[Unknown]: I.V.M.
[Amit Varma]: The purpose of the organization was to set protocols by which mail could be exchanged
[Amit Varma]: between the 22 different nations that were part of it.
[Amit Varma]: You could say to create the HTTP of the offline world.
[Amit Varma]: As the 19th century drew to an end, one of the problems it faced was how to enable a
[Amit Varma]: person in one country to pay the return postage for a letter from another country.
[Amit Varma]: For example, an Italian immigrant to America might send a letter to Italy to his aged parents
[Amit Varma]: and may want to enclose a self-addressed stamped envelope so that they can reply without having
[Amit Varma]: to buy stamps.
[Amit Varma]: But obviously, American stamps will not work in Italy and he can't buy Italian stamps in
[Amit Varma]: America.
[Amit Varma]: So what to do?
[Amit Varma]: The Universal Postal Union came up with a clever solution in 1904.
[Amit Varma]: This was basically an international stamp called the International Reply Coupon or an
[Amit Varma]: IRC, which would be valid anywhere and which could be purchased in any of these countries
[Amit Varma]: for a fixed amount of local currency.
[Amit Varma]: The system works superbly and aspiring writers of a certain vintage may remember that as
[Amit Varma]: recently as the 1990s, publications abroad would ask you to submit your writing to them
[Amit Varma]: with an International Reply Coupon so that the polite rejection letter they would send
[Amit Varma]: you would be at your cost.
[Amit Varma]: Now the Universal Postal Union is an upstanding organization and not the subject of this episode,
[Amit Varma]: but their IRCs set in motion an interesting scheme.
[Amit Varma]: Now remember, these coupons could be bought across all these countries for a set amount
[Amit Varma]: of local currency.
[Amit Varma]: But what happened when currencies fluctuated?
[Amit Varma]: An IRC would automatically become cheaper in one country than another.
[Amit Varma]: And currencies did fluctuate wildly because of World War I.
[Amit Varma]: As the war came to an end in 1919, an Italian immigrant in Boston received some International
[Amit Varma]: Reply Coupons in a mail from Spain.
[Amit Varma]: He realized the opportunity for arbitrage here.
[Amit Varma]: He calculated that if he bought $1 worth of IRCs in Rome, it would be worth $3.30 in Boston,
[Amit Varma]: a profit of 230%.
[Amit Varma]: Other countries had even more devalued currencies, such as Austria, and he could make even more
[Amit Varma]: money there.
[Amit Varma]: So he formulated a business plan.
[Amit Varma]: Buy IRCs cheap in Europe, make a profit selling them in the US.
[Amit Varma]: This was an entirely legitimate business plan.
[Amit Varma]: There's nothing wrong with buying cheap and selling expensive.
[Amit Varma]: Our man needed money for this though, and he had already burnt his fingers with various
[Amit Varma]: failed enterprises in the 15 years since he'd left Italy.
[Amit Varma]: No one was going to lend him large sums of money, but he figured he could get the capital
[Amit Varma]: he needed from small investors.
[Amit Varma]: He formed a company called the Securities Exchange Company, the SEC, which sounds respectable,
[Amit Varma]: and advertised a scheme promising that anyone who invested money with him would get a 50%
[Amit Varma]: return in 45 days.
[Amit Varma]: This is a mad rate of return.
[Amit Varma]: He even turned a few of his initial investors into agents, giving them 10% of whatever investments
[Amit Varma]: they got in.
[Amit Varma]: Everyone who invested automatically became an evangelist of the company, as they rationalized
[Amit Varma]: their investment and began recommending it to others.
[Amit Varma]: Over time, as initial batches of investors actually received that 50% interest, they
[Amit Varma]: became bhakts.
[Amit Varma]: They often reinvested their money while selling property to gather other funds to invest.
[Amit Varma]: Old women invested their savings of a lifetime.
[Amit Varma]: Early men mortgaged their homes to add to their savings that they'd already invested.
[Amit Varma]: In February 1920, the total investments in this scheme were only $5,000.
[Amit Varma]: A month later, $30,000.
[Amit Varma]: By May, over $400,000.
[Amit Varma]: By July, it was bringing in millions.
[Amit Varma]: Once newspaper coverage started in late July, it started bringing in a quarter of a million
[Amit Varma]: dollars a day.
[Amit Varma]: Estimates of how much money was invested in the scheme vary from 15 to 20 million dollars,
[Amit Varma]: and 20 million in those days would be around 250 million today, close to 2000 crore rupees.
[Amit Varma]: The thing is, none of this money was actually invested in IRCs.
[Amit Varma]: Our enterprising entrepreneur found it hard to get hold of IRCs bought in Europe and found
[Amit Varma]: no way to sell them in the US.
[Amit Varma]: Also, the total number of international reply coupons available worldwide was a fraction
[Amit Varma]: of the number that the invested money would buy.
[Amit Varma]: So the scheme clearly could not work.
[Amit Varma]: How did the whole enterprise work then?
[Amit Varma]: Simple.
[Amit Varma]: The securities exchange company basically paid out its investors from the money of later
[Amit Varma]: investors.
[Amit Varma]: Put simply, the first batch would be paid out by the money of the second batch, the
[Amit Varma]: second batch by the money of the third batch.
[Amit Varma]: And as long as the investments kept increasing, as they did because of the high praise by
[Amit Varma]: earlier payouts, all would be well.
[Amit Varma]: But at some point, this would have to end and the whole scheme would collapse, as this
[Amit Varma]: one did.
[Amit Varma]: This sort of fraud, robbing Peter to pay Paul, goes back through the ages.
[Amit Varma]: But in the popular imagination, they are now known by the name of this Italian immigrant
[Amit Varma]: who founded the securities exchange company, Carlo Pietro Giovanni Guglielmi Tebaldo Ponzi,
[Unknown]: Charles Ponzi.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, inspired by recent events at famous internet unicorn
[Amit Varma]: OYO.
[Amit Varma]: I decided to do an episode on Ponzi schemes with my good friend and frequent partner in
[Amit Varma]: crime Vivek Kaul.
[Amit Varma]: But before we get to the discussion itself, some happy news for fans of either Vivek or
[Amit Varma]: me.
[Amit Varma]: Vivek and I have started a new economics podcast called economic funders, in which we take
[Amit Varma]: you through one economic concept per episode, explaining how it applies to everyday life.
[Amit Varma]: The first episode of economic funders, for example, is about the sunk cost fallacy.
[Amit Varma]: And we discuss the Vietnam War, bad marriages, and why you should not finish reading a book
[Amit Varma]: if you're hating it just because you started.
[Amit Varma]: Economic funders is available exclusively on Storytel, the fantastic audio book platform
[Amit Varma]: that has supported the scene and the unseen in the past.
[Amit Varma]: You can sign up for a free trial to Storytel at Storytel.com slash funders, that's Storytel
[Amit Varma]: spelled s t o r y t e l, only one l. Five episodes of economic funders have already
[Amit Varma]: been dropped.
[Amit Varma]: So head on over to Storytel.com slash funders to sign up for your free trial and feast on
[Amit Varma]: the amazing insights and entertaining banter of Vivek Kaul and Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: But self promotion apart, there are plenty of great audio books available on Storytel,
[Amit Varma]: including classics like Raag Darbari and Kashi Kasi.
[Amit Varma]: The Hindi and Marathi collections are particularly awesome.
[Amit Varma]: The English collection is also great.
[Amit Varma]: And now they have economic funders on there.
[Amit Varma]: The first five episodes remember, please use this link to sign up Storytel.com slash funders.
[Amit Varma]: And now before we begin our discussion, an actual short commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Hey, I want to thank Intel for supporting the scene and the unseen.
[Amit Varma]: If you haven't already, I recommend you check out Intel vPro.
[Amit Varma]: Intel vPro is a business platform that makes sure you have the best combination of hardware
[Amit Varma]: and software running.
[Amit Varma]: It maximizes productivity and security.
[Amit Varma]: Like I get so frustrated when I'm trying to open a large media file and it's taking forever.
[Amit Varma]: It just does not happen with Intel vPro, which makes your computing experience as smooth
[Amit Varma]: as butter.
[Amit Varma]: Please don't eat your laptop though.
[Amit Varma]: I'll talk more about the different ways in which vPro increases your productivity in
[Amit Varma]: the coming weeks.
[Amit Varma]: But today, I'd urge you to check out Intel's 8th generation vPro processor.
[Amit Varma]: This processor is much faster on both mobile and PC platforms.
[Amit Varma]: Hell, it's so fast, you won't be able to keep up with what you're doing.
[Amit Varma]: Do hop on over to Intel.in slash vPro that is vPRO to learn how to make your productivity
[Amit Varma]: and your business's productivity go through the roof.
[Guest]: Vivek, welcome to the scene and the unseen.
[Guest]: Hi Amit.
[Guest]: Thanks for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, explain this OYO funda to me like their founder Ritesh Agarwal is apparently spending
[Amit Varma]: an enormous sum of money buying back shares of his own company.
[Amit Varma]: What's happening and where did he get the money from?
[Guest]: So basically, you know, I mean, I don't have any internal information.
[Guest]: But from what I have read in the media, what he seems to be doing is, you know, he is offering
[Guest]: his shares as a collateral, raising money against those shares and buying new shares
[Guest]: and then offering those shares as a collateral, raising more money and buying even more new
[Guest]: shares.
[Guest]: So, you know, so if you know, if you look at it from what you just said, this seems
[Guest]: to have a structure of a Ponzi scheme and so which is where it is important to differentiate,
[Guest]: you know, Ponzi schemes can be fraudulent and then there can be schemes which have a
[Guest]: structure of a Ponzi scheme, but the idea is not to defraud anyone.
[Guest]: So in this case, obviously, you know, the idea is not to defraud anyone.
[Guest]: But if you look at the overall structure of all these platform companies, they have a
[Guest]: very, very Ponzi structure.
[Guest]: Now, why is that?
[Guest]: That is simply because, you know, what they are aiming for is a monopoly in their line
[Guest]: of business.
[Guest]: Now, there's a concept called network externality, which basically means that, you know, with
[Guest]: every extra user on a particular network, the value of that network goes up.
[Guest]: So to give you a, you know, a very, very simple example, Alexander Graham Bell invented the
[Guest]: telephone.
[Guest]: Now, if only Mr. Graham Bell continued to have the telephone, it wouldn't have made
[Guest]: any sense.
[Guest]: But let's say, you know, one more guy started having a telephone.
[Guest]: So then Mr. Graham Bell could talk to that guy, then another guy, you know, had a telephone
[Guest]: and so on.
[Guest]: So more the number of people, you know, who had a telephone, the more the value of the
[Guest]: telephone went up, or to give you a more contemporary example, all of us are, you know, there on
[Guest]: Facebook, because all of us are there on Facebook, right?
[Guest]: We're not there on any other social media network of the kind that Facebook is.
[Guest]: There were other networks of that kind, there was MySpace, there was Orkut, which was particularly,
[Guest]: you know, very, very popular in India.
[Guest]: But once Facebook sort of became the place to be in, everyone sort of moved to Facebook.
[Guest]: Now, what happens here is now, how does it apply in Oyo's case?
[Guest]: Now, Oyo is in the business of renting out hotel rooms, okay.
[Guest]: So obviously, it needs hotels to list on the website.
[Guest]: And it also needs people to come onto the website and book those rooms.
[Guest]: Now, so basically supply and demand.
[Guest]: Now, how does it create demand?
[Guest]: It creates demand by offering discounts, so that people come in and book rooms on Oyo.
[Guest]: So the more people who come on to Oyo to book rooms, the more, you know, hotels should be
[Guest]: interested in listing themselves on Oyo.
[Guest]: And now, how do you get more people to sort of come on to the network is by offering huge
[Guest]: discounts.
[Guest]: And what happens is that the discounts are so huge, and not just in case of Oyo, I mean,
[Guest]: it works across any other, you know, platform company, you know, right from the way Uber
[Guest]: and Ola started to how Swiggy and Zomato are working right now, is, I mean, you offer large
[Guest]: discounts and because of that, you face what is known as high cash burn rate, okay.
[Guest]: Now, this is just basically a jargon, which the platform guys use for, you know, for a
[Guest]: simple word of operating losses, I mean, you operate at a level where the price that you
[Guest]: sell your product at is not profitable.
[Guest]: Now, in order to keep going, they need new money to keep coming in.
[Guest]: And as long as the new money that keeps coming in is greater than the cash burn rate, the
[Guest]: company keeps operating.
[Guest]: So which is why, you know, if you look at Oyo, given their international aspirations,
[Guest]: they need a lot of money because, you know, how do you get people on to Oyo if you don't
[Guest]: offer discounts?
[Guest]: So if you look at the structure, the structure is very similar to that of a Ponzi scheme
[Guest]: where the money being brought in by investors, as long as it is greater than the money going
[Guest]: out, which is basically the losses that the company is facing, the company keeps running.
[Guest]: Now, the aim here is to become a monopoly in that particular area and then sort of make
[Guest]: all the money that you can, I mean, monopolies can simply make money by existing.
[Guest]: So that is what every VC wants.
[Guest]: That is what every leader of a platform company wants.
[Guest]: Now, the thing is, it doesn't, you know, it happens, but it doesn't happen with all companies
[Guest]: and not all the time.
[Guest]: So let's take the example of the search engine business.
[Guest]: Now, you and I will remember that when the internet first came to India, there was nothing
[Guest]: like Google.
[Guest]: There was, you know, there was AltaVista, there was Yahoo, there was even something
[Guest]: called AskJeeves.com.
[Guest]: And then Google came along in 2000 and gradually took over the entire business.
[Guest]: And now the only search engine that, you know, most of the world uses is Google, unless you
[Guest]: are in China.
[Guest]: I mean, then that's a different story.
[Guest]: So Google makes monopoly profits, same is the case with Amazon.
[Guest]: So the way the entire platform business has evolved is, you know, is very, very Ponzi
[Guest]: in structure, because everyone wants to be a monopoly.
[Amit Varma]: So I think in the course of your explanation, there are basically four separate kind of
[Amit Varma]: points that you're making, and I'd like to sort of break them up one by one.
[Amit Varma]: One is, of course, a standard Ponzi scheme, where you correctly point out that a Ponzi
[Amit Varma]: structure may not always be part of a fraud.
[Amit Varma]: In this case, the structure that Ritesh Agarwal used to buy back his shares is like a Ponzi
[Amit Varma]: structure in the sense that he is first, you know, using his existing stake to buy a further
[Amit Varma]: stake and then using that to buy further and so on and so forth, which has a very Ponzi
[Amit Varma]: like feel to it.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come back to discussing Ponzi structures and frauds in the rest of this episode.
[Amit Varma]: The second point is about network externalities, which, you know, is something that all networks
[Amit Varma]: obviously.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I mean, that's how these big sites like Amazon and eBay and what OYO is attempting
[Amit Varma]: to do and Somato and so on, that's kind of how they function.
[Amit Varma]: And there's nothing about it, which is not legit, it's standard, it's, you know, there's
[Amit Varma]: nothing per se, wrong with that logic, and I don't even know why it's Ponzi-like.
[Amit Varma]: What you sort of refer to as Ponzi-like is, I think, and which I was going to ask you
[Amit Varma]: about separately anyway, is that the structure through which these guys get one round of
[Amit Varma]: investing and then another and then another, which is really the greater fool theory where
[Amit Varma]: everyone is investing.
[Amit Varma]: And in some cases, you don't really care whether the business is viable at that stage or is
[Amit Varma]: ever going to be viable.
[Amit Varma]: All you want is at a later stage of funding, you can sell your share and move on.
[Guest]: So basically, all you want is that, you know, you put your money and then that money leads
[Guest]: to more monopoly.
[Amit Varma]: And then that leads to a greater valuation and then you can eventually...
[Amit Varma]: Correct.
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, so a lot of the for example, Ritesh Agarwal's buyback of his shares is actually
[Amit Varma]: the people he's buying out are the early investors of the company.
[Amit Varma]: So even if OYO eventually fails, those the early investors can all say that we made a
[Amit Varma]: wise choice because they actually sold at a profit, they invested something, they sold
[Amit Varma]: at a profit, maybe they sold to, you know, SoftBank or to Ritesh Agarwal himself, it
[Amit Varma]: doesn't matter.
[Amit Varma]: Ritesh Agarwal, of course, he's getting the financing for this from Nomura, which has
[Amit Varma]: a heavy SoftBank investment.
[Amit Varma]: And I find it sort of hard to comprehend how they can be a greater fool in the sense at
[Amit Varma]: this scale, there is no one SoftBank can sell these shares to, where is the cash out for
[Amit Varma]: them, unless they do an IPO at insane valuations and common investors.
[Guest]: Which is what happened to Uber, I mean, if you look at Uber, Uber was being financed
[Guest]: by all these VCs.
[Guest]: Including SoftBank.
[Guest]: And now it's being financed by the shareholders.
[Guest]: I mean, the losses in the last quarter were $5 billion.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, exactly.
[Amit Varma]: So...
[Guest]: And the IPO got cancelled.
[Guest]: So...
[Amit Varma]: The WeWork IPO went through.
[Amit Varma]: The WeWork IPO got cancelled.
[Guest]: Oh, sorry, sorry.
[Guest]: My bad.
[Unknown]: You're confusing.
[Guest]: So Uber, in fact, even had a line in their prospectus, which said that we might never
[Guest]: make money.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: So, the fourth point that you raised that I kind of want to talk about is the monopolies
[Amit Varma]: aspect.
[Amit Varma]: Obviously, every business wants a monopoly, though the thing here is that a monopoly is
[Amit Varma]: only problematic when consumers suffer.
[Amit Varma]: The argument I would make in the case of the seeming monopolies that Amazon and Google
[Amit Varma]: have built up is that, number one, they are monopolies only if you sort of consider what
[Amit Varma]: they are doing in a narrow way.
[Amit Varma]: For example, Facebook is a monopoly in social media, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: But the point is that they're not a monopoly when it comes to how do you spend your time
[Amit Varma]: or how you connect with others or how you communicate with others, where there is a
[Amit Varma]: lot of competition.
[Amit Varma]: So in that strict sense, they're not a monopoly.
[Amit Varma]: Second, there are no barriers to entry.
[Amit Varma]: Other people can and do enter all the time.
[Amit Varma]: And even a seeming monopoly at a particular point in time, like Microsoft once, may be
[Amit Varma]: completely irrelevant a decade later.
[Amit Varma]: And the third point is that as far as any of these so-called Internet monopolies are
[Amit Varma]: concerned, we are still getting extremely cheap prices from Amazon.
[Amit Varma]: We are still getting Google search delivered to us free.
[Amit Varma]: We are still, you know, not having to pay for Facebook.
[Amit Varma]: So I don't really, I mean, first of all, I would object to the definition of those companies
[Amit Varma]: as monopolies.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, I would say that, you know, there are no barriers to entry as such.
[Amit Varma]: And as long as consumers don't suffer for it, like I hear a lot of alarmists talk about
[Amit Varma]: how that they will now spend VC money, they will build up a monopoly and after they have
[Amit Varma]: driven everyone out of the market, they will raise prices, and consumers will suffer.
[Guest]: But the point is, no one actually in this, among these Internet companies actually raise
[Guest]: prices.
[Guest]: No, I don't agree on that.
[Guest]: If you look at what is happening with Uber and Ola, and at least in the last one year,
[Guest]: is that prices have gone up dramatically.
[Guest]: And now it's reached a stage where, because they've managed to destroy, and I'm talking
[Guest]: about Mumbai here, not the other cities, because they've managed to destroy a large part of
[Guest]: the normal Kali Pili business, there is an overall shortage of cabs.
[Guest]: So you get so earlier, what used to happen was the P cars used to start sometime in,
[Guest]: you know, in the evening.
[Guest]: Now there are, you know, prices are high, almost all through the day.
[Guest]: So there are I mean, so there are issues, it's not as straightforward as I agree with
[Guest]: you on Google.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, but my argument about Uber and Ola is that number one, they brought a necessary
[Amit Varma]: disruption and raise the supply and the supply is still higher.
[Amit Varma]: Like, for example, when I left home today, I didn't feel like driving, I was guaranteed
[Amit Varma]: an Uber, maybe I paid more for it than I would have liked to because of peak surcharge, but
[Amit Varma]: fine.
[Amit Varma]: And I could also have taken an auto but the point is the autos were there if I was in
[Amit Varma]: South Mumbai, I would also get the Kali Pili.
[Amit Varma]: What has happened is that the supply has gone up the number of people who can rely on public
[Amit Varma]: transport has gone up massively like so many women tell me that they feel much safer because
[Amit Varma]: along with all the other options which still exist, they also have the relative safety
[Amit Varma]: of an Uber or an Ola.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they have added to the options and I won't be convinced that they've actually
[Amit Varma]: made the public transportation market worse till I actually see data on it.
[Amit Varma]: Because my anecdotal experience sort of indicates that, you know, but anyway, I mean, that's
[Amit Varma]: another argument for another day, that's another argument for another day, we can agree to
[Amit Varma]: disagree and listeners can make up their own mind on that.
[Amit Varma]: But all of this apart, I mean, what really struck me as a Ponzi element was that the
[Amit Varma]: fact that he is pledging his existing shares to buy more shares and then pledging those
[Amit Varma]: to you know, buy more shares and it's not really a scam because these are willing participants.
[Amit Varma]: I think Nomura is giving him the money Nomura is also funded by SoftBank.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, this seems to be like SoftBank fooling itself, which they are entirely entitled
[Guest]: to do.
[Amit Varma]: And even if they were fooling others, these are, you know, open transactions, they're
[Amit Varma]: not actually lying about it.
[Amit Varma]: So it is perfectly fine.
[Amit Varma]: However, Ponzi schemes typically in the way that we understand it outside of the structure
[Amit Varma]: typically frauds, tell me a little bit more about, you know, you co wrote a paper in 2003,
[Amit Varma]: which I had the pleasure to read, you send it across to me.
[Amit Varma]: And that had a whole bunch of sort of Indian examples of earlier Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: Tell me a little bit about those.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's, it's, I mean, Ponzi schemes have been in India for a very, very long time.
[Guest]: And so I'll give you a few examples here.
[Guest]: So one of the earliest, you know, guys who sort of became famous for running Ponzi schemes
[Guest]: was actually an employee of, he was a bus conductor called Ashok Sheregar.
[Guest]: And he ran a number of Ponzi schemes in Mumbai, the famous ones being Vaibhavi Lakshmi, Money
[Guest]: Circulation Scheme, Golden Chain, Dhan Varsha, Kuber and Diamond Circle.
[Guest]: And what he used to do was obviously he promised a high rate of return and the initial investors
[Guest]: were appointed as agents with a promise of 2% commission on their investment.
[Guest]: And the commission was to be passed on when the agent brought in two or more investors.
[Guest]: So the new investors were again appointed as agents.
[Guest]: And so the cycle went on.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, Sheregar did not have a business model or anything in place.
[Guest]: He was just, you know, raising money and the money coming in from the latter investors
[Guest]: was being used to pay off the former ones.
[Guest]: And obviously, as long as the money coming in was more than the money going out, the
[Guest]: schemes ran and then they collapsed.
[Guest]: Now, in case of Sheregar, you know, it was a blatant Ponzi scheme where he did not have
[Guest]: even a semblance of a business model in place.
[Guest]: But normally that is not the case.
[Guest]: You know, all Ponzi schemes have, not all, but a lot of Ponzi schemes have some sort
[Guest]: of a business model in place, or at least they try to sort of show that they have a
[Guest]: business model.
[Amit Varma]: Even Charles Ponzi had that whole international reply coupons.
[Guest]: So I don't know if you remember that, you know, in the 90s, there was this boom of plantation
[Guest]: companies.
[Guest]: And the most famous of the lot was this one called Anubhav Plantations run by a gentleman
[Guest]: called C. Natesan.
[Guest]: Now in one of his schemes for a deposit of rupees 6000, the investor was promised a piece
[Guest]: of land measuring 300 square feet, with three teak saplings planted on it.
[Guest]: Now, and this is a fairly elaborate, you know, business model.
[Guest]: For 20 years, Anubhav would be the caretaker of the land and the trees.
[Guest]: In the first six years, the investor would get rupees 1000 back every year.
[Guest]: So at the end of, let's say, six years, his money that he had invested would already come
[Guest]: back to him.
[Guest]: And a 1000 rupee return on a 6000 rupee investment is pretty high.
[Guest]: I mean, it's almost 16-17% per year, I mean, that's not a bad return at all.
[Guest]: Added amounts of rupees 6000 and 12000 would be returned to the investor at the end of
[Guest]: the sixth year and the twelfth year.
[Guest]: When the scheme ended at the end of the 20th year, the investor got either rupees 3 lakhs
[Guest]: or 40 cubic feet of teak.
[Guest]: Now, the assumption was that each of the three teak trees would yield a volume of 1.13 cubic
[Guest]: meters and each cubic meter of wood would be sold at rupees 88,286.
[Guest]: Now, I mean, this assumption was unrealistic and it never worked.
[Guest]: And obviously, what Natesan was doing was he was taking the money being brought in by
[Guest]: the older and newer investors and paying off the older investors.
[Guest]: So a lot of these schemes have a great, I mean, what looks like a business model in
[Guest]: place.
[Guest]: And this is something that has sort of, you know, gone on forever.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at some of the newer Ponzi schemes also, you know, a few years back,
[Guest]: there was this scheme that came into light called the Stock Guru.
[Guest]: So Stock Guru had a very simple business model.
[Guest]: They promised returns as high as 20% per month on the basis of, you know, buying stocks at
[Guest]: a low price and selling them at a high price.
[Guest]: But 20% return per month, obviously not possible and not possible, I mean, it may be possible
[Guest]: in an odd month here and there, but it's not something that you can guarantee.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, what they were doing was, you know, moving money.
[Guest]: And apparently, and, you know, after a point of time, the scheme collapsed.
[Guest]: So yes, I mean, so most Ponzi schemes have a legitimate business model in place.
[Guest]: Also, you know...
[Guest]: As in they promise what appears to be a legitimate business model.
[Guest]: Yeah, so it promises, it appears to be a genuine investment opportunity.
[Guest]: So another great example here, and again, I mean, I'm using all these 90s examples,
[Guest]: because, you know, when I wrote the paper, you know, we had only the 90s examples, right?
[Guest]: So this was written largely in, I think, 2002-2003.
[Guest]: So I don't know how many people would remember, in some time in the late 1990s, there was
[Guest]: this company called Home Trade, which advertised extensively.
[Guest]: They had Hrithik Roshan, Sachin Tendulkar and Shah Rukh Khan.
[Guest]: I mean, maybe it was not even late 90s, it was probably early 2000s, because Kahona Pyaar
[Guest]: Hai came only in the year 2000.
[Guest]: So anyway, the dates here are, I mean, we can all Google the dates.
[Guest]: So Home Trade essentially had a, again, you know, sort of a business model where they
[Guest]: took money from cooperative banks, based in Maharashtra, and a provident fund called the
[Guest]: Seaman's Provident Fund for investing in short dated government securities.
[Guest]: So again, you know, some semblance of a business model.
[Guest]: The problem was, in most cases, no investment was made.
[Guest]: And when the investment was made, these securities were pledged as collateral to raise more money.
[Guest]: And the money would then be diverted into stock market financing, where higher returns
[Guest]: could be earned, at least, you know, the hope was.
[Guest]: Now, when a bank inquired about the securities, Home Trade would reply that the securities
[Guest]: had gone to RBI for clearance.
[Guest]: I mean, during those days, things used to work manually.
[Guest]: And doing this, Home Trade bought itself time of around six to eight weeks.
[Guest]: On the date of maturity, you know, when the security had to be redeemed, Home Trade had
[Guest]: not invested, you know, or it had diverted money into the stock market.
[Guest]: So what they would do is they would go to another cooperative bank, raise money from
[Guest]: them, and pay off the first one.
[Guest]: And this is how the story went.
[Guest]: And, you know, and we used to sort of wonder as to, you know, what had Sachin and Hrithik
[Guest]: and Shah Rukh got to do with the entire, you know, company, because nobody really understood
[Guest]: at least in the public domain as to what, you know, the company actually did.
[Guest]: So it's just that these brand ambassadors provided that legitimacy to the company, you
[Guest]: know, and then people went in.
[Guest]: So these ads were basically meant for all these cooperative banks to impress them.
[Guest]: Hey, boss, you know, we are paying these guys.
[Guest]: So you know, you can lend us the money.
[Guest]: I mean, so the point here is that a lot of Ponzi schemes have big brand ambassadors.
[Guest]: So the best example here is, and I mean, I hope both of us don't get sued, is that of
[Guest]: Sahara.
[Guest]: Sahara used the Indian cricket team as their brand ambassador, I mean, for a very, very
[Guest]: long time.
[Guest]: I mean, they also sponsored the hockey team.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, when a normal guy who is depositing money with Sahara, I mean, whatever, you know,
[Guest]: the 50 rupees or the 100 rupees or whatever he, you know, deposits daily, he looks at
[Guest]: the fact that these guys are sponsoring the Indian cricket team.
[Guest]: I mean, there is no bigger brand in India than the Indian cricket team, right, at least
[Guest]: much through the 90s and the early 2000s.
[Guest]: I mean, now we can debate because there are badminton stars and yeah, but I like cricketers
[Amit Varma]: are still the biggest guys, right?
[Guest]: So when you have the cricket team, sort of wearing the logo, wearing a company's logo,
[Guest]: obviously, people, you know, will give it money very, very easily.
[Guest]: Now, the problem was, Sahara also was in multiple businesses all over the place.
[Guest]: But you know, whether these businesses were making money, no one really knew.
[Guest]: The core business was chit funds, basically.
[Guest]: But it wasn't, I mean, once upon a time, that is how they started.
[Guest]: What are chit funds?
[Guest]: Are they Ponzi schemes?
[Guest]: No, they're not.
[Guest]: So I'll explain what are chit funds.
[Guest]: So chit funds are essentially, you know, you know, what kitty parties are, right?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Okay, so they're basically kitty parties with a twist.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, what happens in a kitty party is that, you know, women come together, and they contribute
[Guest]: a given amount of money every month.
[Guest]: And then a chit is sort of, you know, selected, and, you know, the name, you know, who are
[Guest]: the woman is whose name is on the on the chit gets all the money contributed in that month.
[Guest]: So let's say, there are 12 women, and they get 10 bucks each, 5000, 10 bucks, an illustration
[Guest]: of example, so there are, let's say, 12 women, and they give a lakh each 5000, 5000, so 5000,
[Guest]: and they meet once a month.
[Guest]: So when they pool the money together, it works out to a total of 60,000 rupees, 12 names
[Guest]: are written on a chit on sheets of paper from these chits, one chit is drawn, and the woman
[Guest]: whose name is on the chit gets the rupees 60,000.
[Guest]: Okay, as simple as that.
[Guest]: Now, when they meet next month, 11 months, 11 names are written on the chits, one name
[Guest]: is drawn, and that woman gets the money, then when they meet again, then 10 names are written,
[Guest]: and so the cycle works.
[Guest]: So, so eventually, you know, there is one woman left who in the last month gets the
[Guest]: 60,000 rupees.
[Guest]: So basically, what is happening here is that, you know, every month by putting in 5000 rupees
[Guest]: every month, you get 60,000 bucks at one go, and you can then do something substantial
[Guest]: with it, right?
[Guest]: Now, of course, the problem here is that, you know, some women might drop out, some
[Guest]: may not be able to pay.
[Guest]: So someone who's already got the money may not pay.
[Guest]: So I mean, there's nothing, you know, that stops people from doing it.
[Guest]: Now, a chit fund actually works slightly differently.
[Guest]: Now, again, let's assume that there are 12 women, and they contribute 5000.
[Guest]: So this means a total of 60,000 has been collected every month.
[Guest]: Then what happens is that the amount that is collected is auctioned to the 12 members
[Guest]: after a minimum discount has been set.
[Guest]: Now, what does that mean?
[Guest]: So let's say the minimum discount is 5000 rupees.
[Guest]: This means that the maximum amount any woman can get from the total rupees 60,000 collected
[Guest]: is rupees 55,000, okay?
[Guest]: After these discount bids are invited, all the women bid.
[Guest]: Now, let's say one woman bids a discount of rupees 12,000.
[Guest]: So this is the highest discount that has been bid and hence she gets the money.
[Guest]: So since the agreed on discount is 12,000, she would get rupees 48,000.
[Guest]: But then there are some, you know, other organizing charges, etc, etc.
[Guest]: So typically, she would get something like a 45,000 rupees.
[Guest]: Okay, now, the discount of 12,000 is basically the profit that the group as a whole has made.
[Guest]: And then it's divided, you know, 12,000 divided by 12.
[Guest]: So 1000 rupees goes to every member.
[Guest]: So now, of course, the woman who got the 45,000 rupees will now keep contributing, you know,
[Guest]: 5000 rupees every month for the remaining 11 months and in every month, there will be
[Guest]: a sort of an auction and the woman who sort of offers the maximum discount will get the
[Guest]: money.
[Guest]: So this is how a chit fund is supposed to work.
[Guest]: So chit funds are not Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: But what happens is, a lot of people who because chit funds are in the imagination of people.
[Guest]: So a lot of people who run Ponzi schemes, call their investment schemes as chit funds.
[Guest]: So which is why chit funds have got a bad name.
[Guest]: I mean, if you look at a state like, you know, what used to be erstwhile Andhra Pradesh and
[Guest]: now is Telangana and Andhra Pradesh, there are lots of big chit funds that are run in
[Guest]: that state and they have been around for a while now.
[Guest]: So in a way, you know, a lot of Ponzi schemes have spoiled the, the name of chit funds.
[Guest]: So, so it's not all chit funds are not Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: But Ponzi schemes are run in the name of running a chit fund very often.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And so chit funds are basically kitty parties, which gives us a great promotional code for
[Guest]: the quote for the episode.
[Amit Varma]: What also interests me is the point noting like while prepping for this episode, I read
[Amit Varma]: this biography of Charles Ponzi called Ponzi scheme by Mitchell Zukov, which you also read.
[Amit Varma]: And excellent book, which I would recommend and which also has one interesting element
[Amit Varma]: of every Ponzi scheme, which is that once people get there, once the first batch of
[Amit Varma]: investors when they get their interest for the first time, number one, what they tend
[Amit Varma]: to do is they tend to reinvest it immediately, because they are obviously greedy.
[Amit Varma]: So you don't even have to pay out the entire batch of first investors.
[Amit Varma]: And secondly, once they actually get the money, like you've put 100 bucks and got 150 bucks
[Amit Varma]: in 45 days, you become a hardcore evangelist for the company, you tell all your friends,
[Amit Varma]: you tell your relatives, you sell your house and put that money in.
[Amit Varma]: And it's just one thing upon another, which is, you know, and towards the end of this
[Amit Varma]: episode, we'll kind of discuss human nature also and why we as a species are particularly
[Amit Varma]: prone to such frauds.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, other animals eat, you know, the fellow members of the species, but they don't cheat
[Amit Varma]: them in this way.
[Amit Varma]: And one angle I'd also like you to expand upon is a multilevel marketing, the MLM angle.
[Amit Varma]: Because, you know, one of the things that you mentioned, which was true of Ponzi also,
[Amit Varma]: which is true of say, Sharagar, what you were saying, is that he turned his early investors
[Guest]: into agents.
[Amit Varma]: And then those agents got a commission, and they had more sub agents.
[Amit Varma]: And that sounds very much to me like a multilevel marketing.
[Guest]: So multilevel marketing now, in case of Ashok Sharagar, he was just getting agents.
[Guest]: Now, if let's say he had a product attached to the entire thing, let's say, you know,
[Guest]: every agent had to sell a bar of soap for 100 bucks, something, you know, some special
[Guest]: bar of soap.
[Guest]: Now, that would have given him a legitimate purpose, right?
[Guest]: So if you look at a lot of multilevel marketing schemes, I mean, even though they sort of
[Guest]: come attached with a product which needs to be sold, the money actually is made in getting
[Guest]: more and more members.
[Guest]: Even those, you know, if you look at even, you know, I mean, legitimate MLM schemes,
[Guest]: you know, the money is basically made by getting more and more members and then selling them
[Guest]: those products, right?
[Guest]: Now, the problem here is that if you do not enter the MLM scheme at a higher level, and
[Guest]: if you enter it at a lower level, I mean, by then it's too late to make any money irrespective
[Guest]: of whether you're in a legitimate scheme or you're in an illegitimate scheme.
[Guest]: Now, you know, if you're in an illegitimate MLM, if you're in what is an outer Ponzi scheme,
[Guest]: I mean, you need to take into account the level that you're entering it at, but then
[Guest]: how do you figure that out?
[Guest]: There is no way of doing that, right?
[Guest]: So the point I'm trying to make here is that if a Ponzi scheme becomes too big, it collapses
[Guest]: under its own weight, okay?
[Guest]: So let me just give you a very simple example here.
[Guest]: Let's say someone starts a Ponzi scheme, okay?
[Guest]: He gets 100 members and each member is supposed to contribute 10,000 rupees and is promised
[Guest]: a return of 50,000 rupees at the end of one year, okay?
[Guest]: Now, if every investor who's promised, I mean, if the guy sort of doesn't want to run away
[Guest]: with the money at the very beginning and wants to sort of be in business at the end of one
[Guest]: year.
[Guest]: So every investor who's paid 10,000 needs to be paid 50,000 rupees, okay?
[Guest]: Now so for every investor who has to be paid off, the guy needs five new investors to come
[Guest]: in.
[Guest]: So for five new investors, he needs 500 investors, okay?
[Guest]: Because then the money will balance itself out.
[Guest]: Now let's say at the end of second year, he wants to continue going again.
[Guest]: So for 500 investors, he needs 2,500 investors.
[Guest]: Then for 2,500, he needs 12,500.
[Guest]: Now by the time you reach the ninth level, the number goes up to something like 19.6
[Guest]: crore or some very big number, right?
[Guest]: So that is not, I mean, you know, to get so many people involved is simply not possible.
[Guest]: So which is why, you know, eventually all Ponzi schemes collapse under their own weight.
[Guest]: And which is why even in an MLM scheme, if you are even in a legitimate MLM scheme, where
[Guest]: you actually make money by selling products, if you're entering it like too late, there
[Guest]: is no way you can, you can only buy products beyond a point everyone else around you would
[Guest]: already be an agent, and they would already be buying products of the company, which is
[Guest]: something which happened to Amway in a very big way, you know, people who entered it in
[Guest]: the early stages made a lot of money, but by, you know, by the time it actually picked
[Guest]: up and the general janta got in, you know, you had some five Amway agents.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: You know, both of us are old enough to remember a time where, you know, the biggest pest in
[Guest]: your social circle was the Amway agent, because he would be freaking desperate, because he's
[Amit Varma]: at the bottom of the scale, he has no way of making money, he's invested tons of money
[Amit Varma]: into this shit.
[Amit Varma]: And it's like you meet them in parties, you meet them at kitty parties.
[Guest]: I mean, they used to have these parties, they used to organize kitty parties too.
[Guest]: In fact, the other point that you know, talking of Amway, it reminds me, so if you look at
[Guest]: these MLM companies, I mean, legitimate and illegitimate, they organize these meetings
[Guest]: where they get their star, sort of, you know, early investors who've made a lot of money,
[Guest]: and then these guys come and give these motivational talks.
[Guest]: And you know, then everyone starts to feel no, you know, we can also do it.
[Guest]: But then it's not about, you know, there was nothing that they did, they just happened
[Guest]: to be at the right place, at the right time and entered the scheme at the right level.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it was as simple as that, you know, and they might even drink their own Koolaid
[Amit Varma]: and they might even think this is a fantastic idea and that they've made so much money like
[Amit Varma]: one of the interesting things I learned about Charles Ponzi was that at one point in time,
[Amit Varma]: he had $7 million in the bank, and he could just have taken his family and gone back to
[Amit Varma]: Italy.
[Amit Varma]: He wasn't even an American citizen.
[Amit Varma]: He was still an Italian citizen and could just have left and gone back to Italy.
[Amit Varma]: But he stayed on because he was actually of the belief that he would come out of this
[Guest]: okay at the end, he managed to convince himself.
[Guest]: So he had, I mean, the number that I remember writing in the paper, he had 40,000 investors
[Guest]: who had invested $15 million at the peak of the scheme.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, the figure that I've read somewhere is at the peak, it was about 20 million, which
[Amit Varma]: would be 250 in current terms, but whatever it was, it was a ton of money and and a lot
[Amit Varma]: of it actually went into paying back the earlier investors and all that.
[Amit Varma]: But at one point in time, he had 7 million free lying around and he could just have fled
[Amit Varma]: and he chose not to flee.
[Amit Varma]: And eventually, of course, he spent two jail terms of five years and I think seven to nine
[Amit Varma]: years respectively, and then he was deported because he wasn't an American citizen.
[Guest]: And he died alone in a welfare hospital in Rio de Janeiro of all places in 1944 or something
[Guest]: 4949.
[Amit Varma]: And his wife also left him in all this and lived to a ripe old age.
[Guest]: In fact, he tried running more Ponzi schemes later in his life.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, really?
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: I didn't read about that.
[Guest]: I mean, something to do with land in Florida, from what I remember reading, yeah, that that
[Amit Varma]: was in fact, after his first jail term, when he came out before the second jail term, he
[Amit Varma]: tried to do something with land in Florida, which again fell apart because he couldn't
[Amit Varma]: raise funds.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, it might actually have worked.
[Amit Varma]: But it's not unlikely that a man with so many jail sentences before is unable, which is
[Guest]: why he went from Boston to Florida.
[Unknown]: I mean, those days.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it wasn't, you know, like separate countries are mostly, mostly like separate
[Amit Varma]: countries.
[Amit Varma]: So fascinating stuff.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, Ponzi schemes is not just something that happens at the unsophisticated
[Amit Varma]: level of housewives who are buying Amway products or whatever, they're very sophisticated.
[Amit Varma]: And we've seen this.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they continue to the present day.
[Amit Varma]: And we've seen this most recently in the case of the multi billion dollar Ponzi scheme run
[Amit Varma]: by Bernie Madoff.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So Bernie Madoff was this guy who, you know, every rich American wanted to invest with,
[Guest]: because he gave stable returns, he never lost money, and he was Jewish.
[Guest]: So that that helps now, but what he was doing all along was basically rotating money.
[Guest]: And when the financial crisis stuck, it just became very, very difficult to continue rotating
[Guest]: money because prices of everything sort of fell.
[Guest]: But even then, his scheme sort of showed a positive rate of return, you know, when everything
[Guest]: else was crashing and hedge funds were sort of shutting down a dozen.
[Guest]: And but ultimately, you know, he just got fed up of it and, and, you know, went and
[Guest]: told the authorities that this is what I've been up to and, you know, and obviously, you
[Guest]: know, justice got done and he was put in jail and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: But the interesting thing here is that, you know, no one caught on to it for so many years,
[Guest]: it was, you know, if he had, if he had managed to sort of write that brief period when the
[Guest]: financial crisis stuck, he would probably have continued, you know, even now.
[Amit Varma]: So there's a very nice book called Anatomy of a Ponzi scheme by Colleen Cross.
[Amit Varma]: And in that she looks at a whole bunch of Ponzi schemes.
[Amit Varma]: And if I remember correctly, half of the biggest 10 of all time, fell apart because of the
[Amit Varma]: 2008 crisis.
[Amit Varma]: Otherwise, like Madoff scheme, no one had, which is the biggest, I think, at about 65
[Amit Varma]: billion.
[Amit Varma]: No one had actually noticed this was a Ponzi scheme, it was a respected investment fund
[Amit Varma]: or hedge fund in different cases, and you kind of put your money there, they're giving
[Amit Varma]: you stable returns, it seems to be, you know, they just seem to be good investors, nothing
[Amit Varma]: else.
[Amit Varma]: But the 2008 crisis meant that, you know, there was a liquidity crunch among investors,
[Amit Varma]: too many investors asked to take their money back.
[Guest]: And, you know, the scam fell apart just out of the country running it.
[Guest]: So yeah, which is so even even closer to home, I mean, I mean, they were West Bengal in the
[Guest]: last decade has had their fair share of Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: And I remember one of my father's friends, you know, called when when when when I think
[Guest]: Sarada was the scheme which went bust, he called up and said, Hey, you know, I lost
[Guest]: so much money.
[Guest]: And it's not like, you know, only the uneducated lot, even the educated lot puts money into
[Guest]: these schemes, and then they lose.
[Guest]: So in fact, the Sarada case is also very interesting that they really cashed in on the celebrity
[Guest]: part of the Ponzi scheme to make themselves, you know, sound legitimate.
[Guest]: So I just like to sort of read out something here.
[Guest]: So Sarada, you know, was run by a gentleman called Sudipta Sen, okay, Sudipta Sen, Sudipta
[Guest]: Sen.
[Guest]: Okay, if you were to pronounce it in the proper Bengali way, Sudipta Sen, okay.
[Guest]: So Sudipta Sen ensured that the Sarada group had huge presence in the media.
[Guest]: I'm quoting the business standard here, which says his first entry into the space was through
[Guest]: Channel 10.
[Guest]: And thereafter, he expanded into Dailies, The Bengal Post, if you remember that newspaper,
[Guest]: and Sakaalvela, which obviously means the afternoon.
[Guest]: In 2010, Sen bought out Tara Channels as well.
[Guest]: At the time of closing down, the group had 10 media outfits, news TV channels, newspapers
[Guest]: and magazines.
[Guest]: Now, this gave a lot of credibility and helped building the brand.
[Guest]: The cine actor Mithun Chakraborty was the brand ambassador for Channel 10.
[Guest]: The Trinamool party was also seen being close to the group.
[Guest]: Now, this is again a Sarada agent called Reba Mitra, you know, telling NDTV.com when the
[Guest]: scam sort of came to the fore.
[Guest]: We put our faith in Sarada because big leaders of the Trinamool like Madan Mitra, Didi, the
[Guest]: Chief Minister, Kunal Ghosh, Shatabdi Roy, Mithun Chakraborty, when these big people
[Guest]: are with them, government people, then would this money be stolen from us?
[Guest]: Now, I mean, this is a very, you know, this is how the entire scheme got its legitimacy.
[Guest]: And you know, the interesting thing is the, the kind of returns that all these schemes,
[Guest]: you know, offer.
[Guest]: Sarada was offering returns of anywhere between 17.5 to 22%, so, which is something that sort
[Guest]: of, you know, attracted a lot of people to, you know, put money there.
[Guest]: You know, another interesting scheme that, you know, I would like to talk about, and
[Guest]: this is also a recent one, is called PACL.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, this was big in and around, you know, Delhi and North India until, you know, the
[Guest]: Securities Exchange Board of India cracked down on it, and the scheme had managed to
[Guest]: sort of, you know, raise as much as 50,000 crore from people.
[Guest]: Now, they also had, you know, their business model was very interesting, so-called, not
[Guest]: the, I mean, there was no business model actually.
[Guest]: So it told people that they were actually buying rights to a plot of land when they
[Guest]: deposited money with the company.
[Guest]: Now, when they wanted the money back, the company would sell the land, but apart from
[Guest]: this underlying fiction, it worked very much like you could walk in and deposit money for
[Unknown]: a high return.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, obviously, there was, you know, they were not selling and buying land and all that,
[Guest]: they were just rotating money.
[Guest]: So this was one of the, you know, the biggest Ponzi schemes in recent times.
[Guest]: And what happens is, you know, when these fraudsters get caught, you hear a lot of news
[Guest]: and then everything fizzles out.
[Guest]: So we never really come to know as to whether these guys were convicted, what happened to
[Guest]: them?
[Guest]: Did people get their money back?
[Guest]: I mean, all this news never reaches us.
[Guest]: And these schemes, you know, continue in one avatar or the other, I mean, there was one
[Guest]: in Bangalore, which recently sort of, you know, came out, that was also associated with
[Amit Varma]: real estate.
[Amit Varma]: No, in abroad, I think the standards is that when Ponzi schemes get uncovered, then all
[Amit Varma]: of those early investors, they have to give up that whatever return that they got on it,
[Amit Varma]: and that goes into a central pool.
[Amit Varma]: And then the overall pool of investors are paid from that in a pro rata way.
[Amit Varma]: So you do actually end up getting some of your money back, like in the original, like
[Amit Varma]: in the Charles Ponzi scheme, for example, I think people got about 27 out of every hundred
[Amit Varma]: dollars I haven't heard of anything in India, of course, in what's also interesting in India
[Amit Varma]: is that all the examples we've discussed are Ponzi schemes done by private parties, where
[Amit Varma]: it is willing individuals who even if they are fooled, at least voluntarily part with
[Amit Varma]: their hard earned money, even if they're fooled on false premises, and obviously the organizers
[Amit Varma]: of those fraud should go to jail.
[Amit Varma]: But after the break, we are going to talk about government run Ponzi schemes, which
[Amit Varma]: are run at a far larger scale, and aware of the people who are actually losing money,
[Amit Varma]: have that money taken from them without their consent.
[Amit Varma]: And in some cases, they aren't even born yet.
[Amit Varma]: These are Ponzi schemes of which the victims are future generations yet to come after a
[Unknown]: short commercial break.
[Unknown]: So that's
[Unknown]: And do check out our daily policy podcast called All Things Policy. It's hosted by the
[Unknown]: researchers at the Takshashila Institute, who break down complex economic and geopolitical
[Unknown]: ideas through the lens of current affairs. New episodes are out every single day. It's
[Unknown]: a fun show. Do check it out.
[Unknown]: As Cyrus says, Cyrus is joined by Devika Mandrikar. She talks about being obsessed with the TV
[Unknown]: show Friends, the joys of being a chef, and growing out of the shadow of her father Sanjay
[Unknown]: Mandrikar.
[Unknown]: The Simplified Gang received a lot of questions from you guys, forcing Chuck, Naren, and Shriketh
[Unknown]: to record a second part of their special 150th episode. Make sure you tune in.
[Unknown]: On The Habit Coach, Ashton talks about the Hawaiian practice of reconciliation, forgiveness,
[Unknown]: and how phrases can impact your life.
[Unknown]: On GayBCD, Sunetra and Farhad reminisce about school and discuss the effects of being bullied
[Unknown]: because of one's queer identity.
[Unknown]: On the Edges and Sledges Cricket Podcast, Ashwin DJ and Varun deep dive into the first
[Unknown]: test between India and South Africa.
[Unknown]: On the Pragati Podcast, Ann Devereux joins Pawan to share how NASA and JPL plan and manage
[Unknown]: interplanetary missions.
[Unknown]: On Boundless, Natasha reads poems on the themes of stepping outside of your comfort zone.
[Unknown]: On Paisa Vaisa, Anupam is joined by Salman Sikar, Chief Dream Officer at Squirrel. They
[Unknown]: have an interesting conversation about how his team came up with the name.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen. I'm chatting with my friend Vivek Kaul about
[Amit Varma]: one of his favorite subjects, Ponzi schemes. And I said before the break that we'll talk
[Amit Varma]: about Ponzi schemes run by the government of which we are the unwilling victims. But
[Amit Varma]: before we do that, Vivek has some other entertaining examples of private Ponzi schemes, which he
[Amit Varma]: would like to tell us about.
[Guest]: Okay, so you know, one of the in the state of Tamil Nadu, some enterprising entrepreneurs
[Guest]: ran a Ponzi scheme around the emu bird, where, you know, you invest money and this entrepreneur
[Guest]: would rear these birds and when they were sufficiently big, he would sell meat, their
[Guest]: oil etc.
[Guest]: He'd give you, you know, whatever money that you're interested in.
[Guest]: Ponzi scheme around cows.
[Guest]: Don't go there. So, so this was one interesting scheme that I remember. Another interesting
[Guest]: scheme was something called Speak Asia. I mean, a lot of people would remember it. Now,
[Guest]: so basically, Speak Asia had a very, again, it had a business model. And the model was
[Guest]: that in order to become a member of Speak Asia, you had to invest 11,000 rupees. The
[Guest]: investment was for subscribing to the electronic magazine issued by the company called Surveys
[Guest]: Today.
[Guest]: Now, this allowed the member to participate in two online surveys every week and make
[Guest]: rupees 500 per survey or rupees 1000 per week. This when converted into an yearly number
[Guest]: came to 52,000 rupees. So the an investment of 11,000 rupees gave you 52,000 at the end
[Guest]: of the year. So which is a return of 373% in one year, not bad at all. Now, obviously,
[Guest]: you know, there were no surveys or even if they were, they were, they were not as many
[Guest]: as were required to sort of generate the return that the company had promised. So ultimately,
[Guest]: the scheme collapsed. Now, in my particular case, you know, the reason I remember this
[Guest]: very well is that at that particular point of time, I used to work for a weekly personal
[Guest]: finance newspaper. And Speak Asia had a half page ad in it. So you know, imagine a Ponzi
[Guest]: scheme being advertised in a personal finance newspaper. I mean, Speak Asia had ads all
[Guest]: over the place. Yeah, it wasn't just just that, just that newspaper, the ads were published
[Guest]: in but including that newspaper. So another interesting scheme that I remember is is was
[Guest]: a Russian Ponzi scheme called MMM, which finally came to India as well. And they you know,
[Guest]: where they were the most blatant of the lot in the sense that they offered to grow an
[Guest]: initial investment of rupees 5000 to rupees 3.4 crore at the end of I mean, and there
[Guest]: were some and when I wrote pieces against that Ponzi scheme, there were people who got
[Guest]: back to me in order to tell me that, you know, I didn't understand the business model. So
[Guest]: it happens every time, you know, this is a standard response when you write on a Ponzi
[Guest]: scheme, people write back to you that, you know, you don't know anything about this.
[Guest]: So you should shut up and keep your theory with you, because we are actually making money.
[Guest]: And that's the best part, you know, as we discussed, the initial guys always make money
[Guest]: and then they become, you know, evangelists for the company and go around telling people
[Guest]: that boss, I have made money, this is safe. And you know, you can also invest in it.
[Amit Varma]: But in this case, who's going to put 5000 and actually make 3 point whatever crores
[Unknown]: at the end of the year, how many more suckers do you need for that?
[Guest]: People did fall for it initially.
[Amit Varma]: In the case of the government, of course, there's no falling for it, because we are
[Amit Varma]: willy nilly entrapped into it by way of being taxpayers and which matter, we do not have
[Amit Varma]: a choice.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit like, you know, earlier before this, when we were having breakfast at the
[Amit Varma]: most excellent car social, we had Sid's very posh breakfast with ham and cheese omelette.
[Amit Varma]: And over there, you when I mentioned to you that, when I was speaking about how America's
[Amit Varma]: social security is a Ponzi scheme, you said why India's also expand a bit.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, if many of us invest in small savings schemes run by the post office,
[Guest]: this includes everything from, you know, the post office accounts to post office monthly
[Guest]: income scheme to public provident fund and so on so forth.
[Guest]: Now, the way it works is very, very interesting.
[Guest]: So all this money essentially is collected, and it comes under the National Small Savings
[Guest]: Fund.
[Guest]: And what happens is, so let's say, in a given year, 1,50,000 crore is the money coming into
[Guest]: these schemes.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: And in that year, if 50,000 crore is to be redeemed, then 50,000 crore is taken from
[Guest]: that 1,50,000 crore and redeemed.
[Guest]: And the remaining 1,00,000 crore is a revenue in the annual budget of the Indian government.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So, so what is happening here is as long as the money that keeps coming into these schemes
[Guest]: is higher than the money that needs to be paid off to the investors whose investment
[Guest]: is maturing, you know, the scheme will keep running.
[Guest]: So it has a structure of a Ponzi scheme wherein new money is being used to pay off the investment
[Amit Varma]: that is being redeemed.
[Amit Varma]: My impression was that whatever you sort of deposit is invested by them into something
[Amit Varma]: else and they get a rate of return there and that is a basis.
[Guest]: No, so what happens is the money is first repaid and then the remaining money, the National
[Guest]: Small Savings Fund is invested into various things.
[Guest]: But then what if you know what it is invested in, you will not, you know, it will screw
[Guest]: you up even further.
[Guest]: So the NSS of money right now, a lot of it is has been lent to the Food Corporation of
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Because what happens is now, so Food Corporation of India buys, and this is something we've
[Guest]: discussed before, buys rice and wheat primarily directly from the farmers.
[Guest]: Of late it's also bought pulses and oilseeds.
[Guest]: Now it buys rice and wheat at a certain rate, but it sells them at a very, very low rate
[Guest]: through the public distribution system, through the ration shops in order to fulfill the terms
[Guest]: and conditions under the Food Securities Act.
[Guest]: So obviously the difference is huge and this difference has to be refunded to the Food
[Guest]: Corporation of India because otherwise, you know, the institution will collapse.
[Guest]: And so what happens is that in every budget, the government has allocations towards food
[Guest]: subsidy and a lot of this food subsidy allocation goes to compensate the Food Corporation of
[Guest]: India.
[Guest]: But in the recent years, what has happened is that the Food Corporation of India is not
[Guest]: being refunded totally.
[Guest]: So as of March 2019, the money that the government owed the Food Corporation of India was more
[Guest]: than 1,60,000 crore.
[Guest]: Now if this is the case, you know, so if the government is not repaying the Food Corporation
[Guest]: of India, the Food Corporation of India has to borrow that money from somewhere in order
[Guest]: to continue to be in business.
[Guest]: So of the 1,60,000 crore, close to more than 90,000 crore, I think 94,000 crore, if I remember
[Guest]: the number correctly, has been borrowed from the National Small Savings Fund.
[Guest]: Now why has it been borrowed from the National Small Savings Fund is because if they were
[Guest]: to sort of borrow that money, you know, from the normal banking channels, then they would
[Guest]: crowd out the private borrowers and then interest rates would go up even further.
[Guest]: So it's a huge, huge mess.
[Guest]: I mean, if you start digging into the accounts of the government, it's just bizarre beyond
[Guest]: a point.
[Guest]: So this is a I mean, so this is one example, this is one example of how a Ponzi schemes
[Guest]: being run within the government.
[Guest]: The other thing is, as we talked about the entire idea of a fiscal deficit of a perpetual
[Guest]: fiscal deficit is nothing but a Ponzi scheme, I mean, if you if you look at it, now, I mean,
[Guest]: any government, most governments across, you know, across the world, and this includes
[Guest]: central and state governments, run a fiscal deficit, which basically means they don't
[Guest]: earn as much as they spend.
[Guest]: Now, in order to finance that fiscal deficit, they need to borrow money, okay, and they
[Guest]: borrow money.
[Guest]: And this fiscal deficit continues.
[Guest]: So basically, what is happening here is that at any given point of time, if the money that
[Guest]: has been borrowed by the government has to be repaid, how is it being repaid?
[Guest]: It is being repaid by borrowing more money, okay.
[Guest]: Now, how does the government borrow money, it borrows money by selling government securities,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So these securities are sold, and the money comes in and it is used to pay off the government
[Guest]: securities which are maturing.
[Guest]: Okay, now these new securities when their time to you know, comes when they are to mature,
[Guest]: then the government borrows more money and repays this.
[Guest]: And so the so the structure goes now, the thing here is this can only happen if the
[Guest]: government is borrowing money in its own currency.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at a lot of South American countries, they end up borrowing in dollars.
[Guest]: Because you know, borrowing in dollar is cheaper than borrowing in your local currency.
[Guest]: But the problem there is then, in order to repay those dollars, you need to earn those
[Guest]: dollars as well.
[Guest]: And in many cases, they don't have they are unable to earn those dollars.
[Guest]: And then finally, they just default.
[Guest]: So which is not going to happen in the Indian case, because the Indian government at least
[Guest]: up until now borrows majorly in rupees.
[Amit Varma]: And also apart from further borrowings, I suppose how they services debts is also of
[Amit Varma]: future taxpayers.
[Amit Varma]: So one way of doing that is the two ways of doing that one is that either you raise tax
[Amit Varma]: taxes in the future, which means future taxpayers are paying for your profligacy today, or you
[Amit Varma]: can simply print money which leads to inflation, which is of course a tax on the poor.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a future poor, who are therefore paying for your profligacy today.
[Amit Varma]: In either way, this is sort of a Ponzi scheme through time where effectively and this is
[Amit Varma]: one of the classic criticisms of the Social Security in America, where you are basically
[Amit Varma]: borrowing from future generations to spend on current ones, and which is expected to
[Amit Varma]: be a crisis when for example, the baby boomers reach retirement age, and you know, at some
[Amit Varma]: point in time, that scheme is expected to inevitably fall apart unless reformed drastically
[Guest]: before.
[Guest]: In fact, so I wanted to make a couple of more points.
[Guest]: Now, you know, look at all the small savings schemes.
[Guest]: If you speak to any corporate economist, he will tell you that the interest rates on small
[Guest]: savings schemes need to come down, because they are higher than bank deposits.
[Guest]: And in order to compete with small savings schemes, banks need to offer a higher rate
[Guest]: of interest.
[Guest]: And because banks are offering a higher rate of interest on the deposits, they need to
[Guest]: charge a higher rate of interest on their loans.
[Guest]: Now, the reason that, you know, interest on small savings schemes cannot come down dramatically
[Guest]: is because the government wants money to keep coming into these schemes, because if money
[Guest]: doesn't come into these schemes, how are they going to pay for all the you know, money which
[Guest]: is maturing all the investment which is maturing.
[Guest]: So which is why the rate of interest on on on on small savings schemes will always be
[Guest]: higher than rate of interest on fixed deposits, because otherwise the entire Ponzi structure
[Guest]: will collapse.
[Guest]: Now, if the Ponzi structure collapses for a private guy, he can just run, but for a
[Guest]: government, the government cannot run, right, the government will have to still pay all
[Guest]: the money which is maturing, which will come from taxpayers, which will then have to come
[Guest]: from, you know, other parts of the budget, which basically, and when it comes from the
[Guest]: other parts of the budget, then the problem is that you have to cut expenditure somewhere
[Guest]: else or raise taxes.
[Guest]: So which is, you know, one part.
[Guest]: The other interesting thing is, you know, is what economists call financial repression.
[Guest]: Now, financial repression in the Indian context is forcing banks to buy government securities.
[Guest]: So by law, banks have to invest a certain percentage of their deposits in government
[Guest]: securities.
[Guest]: I think as of now, it's around 18.75%.
[Guest]: But banks on their own, I think, would probably have invested more than 25% of their money
[Guest]: in government securities.
[Guest]: Now what this does is that it allows the government access to money, I mean, this is money which
[Guest]: has to come into government securities, I mean, the same is the case with insurance
[Guest]: companies where a certain proportion of, you know, money raised has to be compulsorily
[Guest]: invested in government securities.
[Guest]: So what this does is it keeps the interest rates lower than they actually would have
[Guest]: been if the government did not force these institutions to buy government securities.
[Amit Varma]: So there is, and,
[Amit Varma]: And not just that, I'm assuming that the cost of borrowings for us common people from these
[Amit Varma]: private banks is higher than it would otherwise would be because they have to make up somewhere
[Amit Varma]: for the inefficient investments in government securities.
[Guest]: And you know, also, it is the interesting thing here is that this is also why the government
[Guest]: doesn't let go of the Life Insurance Corporation of India, because ultimately, a lot of money
[Guest]: that LIC raises through its so called insurance policies finds its way into, you know, government
[Guest]: securities.
[Guest]: Also, you know, when the government is selling shares in companies that it owns, and which
[Guest]: investors do not want to buy, then LIC has to come to the rescue of the government.
[Guest]: And then this money helps in you know, financing the fiscal deficit and so the Ponzi scheme.
[Amit Varma]: So now, as you pointed out in the first half of the show, Ponzi schemes run by private
[Amit Varma]: parties have a natural end, at some point, they cannot continue anymore, and they fall
[Amit Varma]: apart.
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: Does this fall apart?
[Guest]: No, I mean, so this can continue as long as there are people, as long as there are people
[Guest]: and as long as you know, as I said, I mean, as long as the money coming into the, you
[Amit Varma]: know, government bonds is there, I mean, then which they can actually mandate as they do
[Amit Varma]: in the case of private banks, you know, it can continue up until then, yes.
[Amit Varma]: And we pay a price, which is sort of largely unseen.
[Guest]: This is unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, this is totally unseen.
[Amit Varma]: This is totally unseen.
[Amit Varma]: You'd also mentioned while we were chatting over our excellent respective ham and cheese
[Amit Varma]: omelettes with some superb black coffee that there's a certain kind of naturally occurring
[Amit Varma]: Ponzi scheme because of the nature of the financial system.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: So, you know, there is a Nobel Prize winning economist called Robert Shiller, whose latest
[Guest]: book Narrative Economics is brilliant, by the way, I'm also halfway through it.
[Guest]: It's a great book.
[Guest]: And also, you know, one thing about Shiller is that, I mean, unlike a lot of other economists,
[Guest]: he is not out and out theoretical.
[Guest]: And he does make predictions which come right.
[Guest]: I mean, like, his book Irrational Exuberance came the first edition came almost a few months
[Amit Varma]: before the dot com bubble burst early 99, I think, if I remember correctly, then he
[Guest]: also his second edition of Irrational Exuberance came a couple of years before the real estate
[Amit Varma]: bubble burst.
[Amit Varma]: So he does have a I also make good predictions like this episode is going to be released
[Amit Varma]: on this coming Monday.
[Guest]: That's a very bad joke, even by your standards.
[Guest]: So yeah, so Shiller essentially talks about, you know, naturally occurring Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: And so obviously, he calls them naturally occurring Ponzi schemes because they happen
[Guest]: without the contravents of a fraudulent manager.
[Guest]: And so what he essentially says is, and I'm paraphrasing here, when speculative prices
[Guest]: in the stock market, I mean, share prices go up, creating successes for some investors.
[Guest]: This may attract public attention, promote word of mouth enthusiasm and heighten expectations
[Guest]: for further price increases.
[Guest]: The stock market is the best example.
[Guest]: Stories about stock markets going up spread very fast.
[Guest]: Investors in an optimistic mood might want to buy stock and take the stock price further
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: This leads to more investors entering the market, fueling an even greater price rise
[Guest]: and the cycle gets repeated over and over again.
[Guest]: As Shiller writes, when prices go up a number of times, investors are rewarded by price
[Guest]: movements in these markets, just as they are in Ponzi schemes, OK?
[Guest]: Now, the high prices are not sustainable since they are driven by unrealistic expectations
[Guest]: of further price increases.
[Guest]: The bubble eventually bursts and price crashes.
[Guest]: Now, I mean, this works in, you know, so many different cases.
[Guest]: I mean, you look at the entire, you know, the Modi bull run, the so-called Modi bull
[Guest]: run, which has been on since September 2013.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, stock brokerages have essentially been driving this story over and over again
[Guest]: in various forms.
[Guest]: But ultimately, the earnings of the companies haven't caught on to the price increases.
[Guest]: So it's just the money that keeps coming in, which, you know, which drives up the prices,
[Guest]: making it a beautiful example of a naturally occurring Ponzi scheme.
[Guest]: Or if you look at real estate, I mean, the rally between almost 2002, 2003 to 2011, 12,
[Guest]: 13, I mean, people used to just, you know, blindly invest in real estate because a whole
[Guest]: generation had seen just prices going up.
[Guest]: But beyond a point, you know, the prices reached a stage where it wasn't just, I mean, prices
[Guest]: were going up not because there was genuine demand for these homes.
[Guest]: They were going up because there were these investors who had money and they were buying
[Guest]: and flipping.
[Guest]: And ultimately, you know, even that game stopped.
[Guest]: And if you look at how, you know, real estate has gone in the last five, six years, it's
[Guest]: it's by, you know, it's by and large been a mess, primarily because the prices reached
[Guest]: a stage where they just became unsustainable and, and prices continue to remain high, which
[Amit Varma]: is why the recovery hasn't happened.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you and I have an excellent episode on why, despite demand having gone down in
[Amit Varma]: real estate prices haven't followed suit, which is not what you would expect, theoretically.
[Amit Varma]: But I guess all bubbles in a sense, work in the Ponzi structure in the sense that let's
[Amit Varma]: say that there is a share of a company which should logically given sales and given revenues
[Amit Varma]: and all of that sell, you know, within a narrow band.
[Amit Varma]: But when it goes above that, it's basically investors are then buying it expecting it
[Amit Varma]: to rise further, which brings a greater fool theory into play, because they are buying
[Amit Varma]: at a high price, but they don't care that it's too high, because you know, someone will
[Amit Varma]: buy it for higher, which is again a classic case of a later investor paying off an earlier
[Amit Varma]: investment.
[Amit Varma]: And this continues to a point where because of all kinds of reasons, maybe the internal
[Amit Varma]: logic breaks down, or external events cause a crash, where it all kinds of falls apart.
[Amit Varma]: And the last guy left holding the can goes down.
[Amit Varma]: But as you know, Chuck Prince, who was then head of Citibank famously said in 2007, when
[Amit Varma]: he was asked about this about, you know, why do you keep participating in a bubble and
[Amit Varma]: Prince said, quote, as long as the music's playing, you have to dance, stop, quote, and,
[Amit Varma]: and that's often what happens.
[Amit Varma]: So, all these people participating in this Ponzi scheme of stock market bubbles or real
[Amit Varma]: estate bubbles aren't necessarily fools, they're behaving rationally, because they see the
[Amit Varma]: high probability of a greater fool along the road, so that they can make a profit.
[Guest]: And thus history continues to talk about naturally occurring Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: They've been described beautifully in this book, written by Charles Mackey, which was
[Guest]: published in 1841, Madness of Crowds, Memoirs of Extraordinary Popular Delusions and the
[Guest]: Madness of Crowds.
[Guest]: It's, I mean, highly recommended not, you know, if you read it, not every chapter will
[Guest]: be interesting.
[Guest]: But some of the chapters are very, very interesting.
[Guest]: And it's freely available on the link all these books we mentioned from the show notes.
[Guest]: So in this book, you know, he describes the tulip mania in Holland, in the 1630s.
[Guest]: The first account of tulips in Europe is from 1559, when a collector of exotic flora, Counsellor
[Guest]: Hermat, received a consignment of tulip bulbs from a friend in Constantinople, which is
[Guest]: now Istanbul, which he planted in his garden in Germany.
[Guest]: His tulips drew a good deal of attention.
[Guest]: In the following years, this flower became more and more popular among the upper classes,
[Guest]: particularly in Germany and Holland, where it became a custom to order bulbs at an exorbitant
[Guest]: price directly from Constantinople.
[Guest]: Up to 1634, this custom became increasingly common, and from that, affluent society in
[Guest]: Holland considered a lack of tulip collection to be of poor taste.
[Guest]: So you need to have tulips in your house.
[Guest]: Year after year, tulip prices rose, finally reaching astronomical heights.
[Guest]: By 1636, the demand for tulip bulbs had risen drastically, and people started to trade them
[Guest]: in exchanges across many towns in Holland.
[Guest]: Tulips were bought by well-to-do collectors as well as by agents and speculators.
[Guest]: At the smallest price drop, they would buy only to sell it later at a profit.
[Guest]: Many individuals suddenly grew rich.
[Guest]: A golden bait hung tempting out before the people.
[Guest]: One after the other, they rushed into tulip markets like flies around a honeypot.
[Guest]: At last, however, the more prudent ones began to see the folly that this could not last
[Guest]: forever.
[Guest]: Rich people no longer bought the flowers to keep them in their gardens, but to sell them
[Guest]: again at a profit.
[Guest]: It was seen that somebody must lose fearfully in the end.
[Guest]: As this conviction spread, prices fell and never rose again.
[Guest]: Now, you know, so this is how the Dutch tulip bubble played out.
[Guest]: In fact, the tulip bubble is still playing out very well for Holland.
[Guest]: I mean, you know, people from all over the world go there to see the tulips.
[Amit Varma]: And in fact, the question that I would ask for you to ponder about is how is buying tulips
[Amit Varma]: for investment back in the day different from, say, buying art for investment today?
[Guest]: Because at the end of the day, it's all about people's perceptions.
[Guest]: 100 percent.
[Guest]: I mean, see, value is perception at the end of the day.
[Guest]: You take your shots and it goes where it goes.
[Guest]: Yes.
[Guest]: So, you know, we were talking about, you know, naturally occurring Ponzi schemes.
[Guest]: Now, if you look at the way a lot of private CEOs of private companies, private banks talk
[Guest]: these days, I mean, you know, they are perpetually trying to project a positive economic environment.
[Guest]: I mean, if you ask them how well the economy is doing, I mean, they're rarely negative.
[Guest]: I mean, and I mean, one reason, obviously, is that no, no CEO in India wants to irritate
[Guest]: the government.
[Guest]: That is a perpetual given, but beyond that, you know, they have a personal incentive in
[Guest]: ensuring that their stock prices keep going up simply because they own a lot of stock
[Guest]: options.
[Guest]: So, it is in their interest to ensure that they keep talking up the stock as well as
[Guest]: the economy.
[Guest]: So, this is another excellent example of a spin off of a naturally occurring Ponzi scheme.
[Amit Varma]: And added incentive is not just a personal stock options, but also that they are judged
[Amit Varma]: on short term results.
[Amit Varma]: And one metric for those short term results is how well is the company's stock doing.
[Amit Varma]: So, it is more profitable for them to say, do and say things which impact the short term
[Amit Varma]: performance of the company in the stock market, rather than the long term fiscal health of
[Guest]: the company, for example.
[Amit Varma]: Not very different from our politicians.
[Amit Varma]: Not very different from our politicians who are always fighting for elections and therefore
[Guest]: are in perpetual campaign mode.
[Guest]: So, which again tells you that their structure is also very Ponzi in nature.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, one interesting thing regarding CEOs is the Lake Wobegon effect.
[Amit Varma]: Have you heard of that?
[Amit Varma]: No.
[Amit Varma]: So, a guy called Garrison Keillor wrote a book, wrote a novel called Lake Wobegon Days,
[Amit Varma]: which was about a town called Lake Wobegon, where everybody was above average.
[Amit Varma]: Now, you might, of course, ask with your mathematical mind, how can everybody be above average because
[Amit Varma]: the average is on average, they'll be average.
[Amit Varma]: And that has led to this thing called the Lake Wobegon effect on the compensation of
[Amit Varma]: CEOs, where what happens is that every time a company wants to hire a CEO, whoever they
[Amit Varma]: want to hire, will demand a higher compensation than the market under the logic and the previous
[Amit Varma]: guy under the logic that look, you're hiring somebody better, that's why you're hiring
[Amit Varma]: somebody otherwise, why you know, and what happens because of this is that CEO salaries
[Amit Varma]: tend to rise and rise with reference to previous CEO salaries, and to the average of the market,
[Amit Varma]: because they have to get more than average, until a point where they rise beyond any,
[Amit Varma]: you know, rational reasoning, all based on supply and demand, of course, because the
[Amit Varma]: companies also have no choice.
[Guest]: And that just so that's known as sort of the Lake Wobegon effect.
[Guest]: So just to add to it, no, I mean, I just remembered that, I think up until the early 90s, the
[Guest]: Securities and Exchange Commission in the US did not ask companies to compulsorily disclose
[Guest]: CEO salaries, then they thought that, you know, it would be better, more transparency
[Guest]: and all that.
[Guest]: So, so they said, Okay, now, you know, all companies have to compulsorily declare CEO
[Amit Varma]: salaries.
[Guest]: Yeah, what did what this did was that up until then, the CEOs did not know the salaries of
[Guest]: other CEOs, now, they knew the salaries of other CEOs.
[Guest]: So when they were negotiating, obviously, they wanted higher salaries, and the net net
[Guest]: effect was that, you know, CEO salaries instead of, you know, so the idea was that once you
[Guest]: sort of declare CEO salaries and put them in public domain, then you know, the shareholders
[Guest]: would take over.
[Guest]: And if they felt that the CEO is sort of getting more than he should, I mean, then there would
[Guest]: be some activism.
[Guest]: And so all that never happened.
[Guest]: But what happened was that the the benchmark of CEO salaries was set very, very clearly
[Guest]: and salaries instead of, you know, moderating, they actually inevitably, another example
[Amit Varma]: of a similar in a very different context, but a similar effect and similar unintended
[Amit Varma]: consequences is the anti defection law in India.
[Amit Varma]: The anti defection law in India, I had an episode on this with Varun Mitra very old
[Amit Varma]: episode came about in about I think 1986, or around that time mid 80s.
[Amit Varma]: And the idea was very good.
[Amit Varma]: The idea was that look, you know, MPs keep defecting to other parties for money, let's
[Amit Varma]: have a law by which they cannot defect.
[Amit Varma]: And they have to vote with their party in parliament, there is no option, they just
[Amit Varma]: have to.
[Amit Varma]: And the result of that the unintended consequences of that is that all parliamentary debate in
[Amit Varma]: India has completely stopped earlier, especially around the time of independence, you had a
[Amit Varma]: tradition of lively erudite debates in parliaments on all kinds of issues.
[Amit Varma]: Today, you have no debates at all, except for, you know, performatives, performatively
[Amit Varma]: speaking to your own side, but you have effectively have no parliamentary debate anymore, because
[Amit Varma]: it doesn't matter, you have to vote with your party.
[Amit Varma]: And you could effectively run parliament from an Excel sheet.
[Amit Varma]: I don't even understand why the members have to be physically present, because the anti
[Amit Varma]: defection law renders them completely impotent in terms of actual decision making or affecting
[Amit Varma]: the course of parliament, but that is a digression, let us get back to smaller frauds, Ponzi frauds.
[Guest]: Oh, even bigger ones, actually.
[Amit Varma]: So, speaking of something bigger, you had mentioned to me while we were having breakfast
[Amit Varma]: Vivek that Ponzi schemes are not just you know, private frauds run by companies or even
[Amit Varma]: governmental ones within a country, but they can take on a geopolitical scale and impact
[Amit Varma]: the entire financial system of the world.
[Guest]: Can you elaborate on that a bit?
[Guest]: So this is, you know, more we're talking more in terms of structure, rather than, you know,
[Guest]: there's no fraud element here.
[Guest]: So I mean, if you look at the US dollar, now, the way the global financial system evolved
[Guest]: post 1945, the dollar came to be at the heart of it.
[Guest]: And you know, this obviously started at the Bretton Woods conference in New Hampshire
[Guest]: in July 1944, where it was decided that, you know, the dollar would be one currency which
[Guest]: would continue to be convertible into gold.
[Guest]: Now, because of this, what happened was that countries started having their reserves, their
[Guest]: international reserves in dollars, because dollar was the only currency convertible into
[Guest]: gold.
[Guest]: Before that, they used to have, you know, their reserves in the British pound because
[Guest]: pound was also convertible into gold, but post the Second World War, because America
[Guest]: had most of the monetary gold in the world, it sort of became came at the heart of the
[Guest]: global financial system.
[Guest]: Now, what has happened is because the you know, of this over the years, the much of
[Guest]: the international trade has also moved to dollars, before that it was sort of split
[Guest]: between you know, pound and dollar and so on, and so on and so forth.
[Guest]: Now, now let's take the case of when I'm talking very simple terms here, let's take the case
[Guest]: of United States and China.
[Guest]: Now, the US is a net importer from China, it buys a lot of goods produced in China.
[Guest]: Now, China obviously gets paid in dollars.
[Guest]: Now, when a Chinese exporter gets these dollars back into China, he has to convert them into
[Guest]: Yuan.
[Guest]: And when he converts them into, he has to convert them into Yuan, because his expenses,
[Guest]: his reporting everything is in Yuan.
[Guest]: So these dollars then land up at as foreign exchange reserves at the People's Bank of
[Guest]: China, which is the Chinese Central Bank.
[Guest]: Now, these dollars can, you know, either continue remaining in the remaining with the People's
[Guest]: Bank of China, or they can be invested somewhere.
[Guest]: So then they are invested, the dollars are invested in American government securities.
[Guest]: Now, because China earns, you know, so many, you know, a lot of dollars, a lot of dollars,
[Guest]: more than a trillion dollars have been invested in American government securities.
[Guest]: The same is the case with Japan, Japan has also invested more than a trillion dollars.
[Guest]: So because so much foreign money comes into US government securities, the interest rates
[Guest]: that the US government needs to offer on those securities becomes very low, because you know,
[Guest]: the demand is huge.
[Guest]: Now, when the interest rate that the US government is paying on its bonds is low, that becomes
[Guest]: a benchmark for the overall interest rate scenario in the US, which is also low.
[Guest]: So at lower interest rates, you know, people can borrow and buy stuff.
[Guest]: And a lot of this stuff that gets bought is made in China.
[Guest]: And because of this, you know, dollars which come back into the US in and get invested
[Guest]: in US government treasuries ensure that interest rates are low, and consumer demand is high.
[Guest]: And because of this Chinese companies benefit and more dollars go into China.
[Guest]: And then these dollars are converted into Yuan, and then find their way back into the
[Guest]: US government treasury securities, and again, ensure that interest rates continue to remain
[Guest]: low.
[Guest]: So there is a there is a cycle, there is a structure to it, where money goes from the
[Guest]: US to China and comes back to the US and in the process ensures lower interest rates.
[Guest]: It also ensures that the world continues the world trading system, so to say continues
[Guest]: to be on the US dollar, right?
[Guest]: I mean, it gives us an exorbitant privilege where in every country in the world needs
[Guest]: to earn these dollars, the US can simply print it.
[Guest]: Now, Donald Trump has this thing in his head that in order to make America great again,
[Guest]: he has, you know, American imports have to come down, and exports have to go up.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, we've had a couple of episodes on the trade deficit and, you know, as a point
[Amit Varma]: that we repeatedly keep making on different fora is that there's nothing wrong with the
[Amit Varma]: trade deficit.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, ultimately, all trade happens to mutual benefit.
[Amit Varma]: You know, I have a trade deficit with my domestic health, for example, you know, I pay her every
[Amit Varma]: month she never pays, she buys anything from me.
[Amit Varma]: And that's fine, because we're both benefiting, it's at mutually agreed terms and trade happens
[Amit Varma]: between the individuals of both countries.
[Amit Varma]: But Trump, for some reason, sees the world in zero sum ways, and therefore he thinks
[Amit Varma]: that this trade deficit is a problem that if they are making more dollars, and we must
[Amit Varma]: be losing something.
[Guest]: Right.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, the entire the trade system as it has evolved with, you know, money
[Guest]: finding its way, trade and financial system, with money, all these dollars from all these
[Guest]: countries, you know, China is just with one example, but Japan, Saudi Arabia, even India,
[Guest]: I mean, all these dollars find not all but a lot of these dollars find their way back
[Guest]: into the US.
[Guest]: And this essentially ensures that the interest rates in US continue to remain low.
[Guest]: Now, there is a global trade war on currently with and Trump is making it more and more
[Guest]: difficult for Americans to import goods from China.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Now, if America doesn't import goods from China, then China doesn't earn those dollars,
[Guest]: right.
[Guest]: So one impact of that is that those dollars then again, don't find their way back into
[Guest]: America.
[Guest]: The other impact is that if China doesn't own on those dollars, it also doesn't earn
[Guest]: money to buy stuff from other countries.
[Guest]: So if it had earned that money, and it had bought stuff from other countries, those dollars
[Guest]: would also eventually find its way back into America and ensure lower interest rates.
[Guest]: So Trump is essentially attacking his own people, his own people in and he's attacking
[Guest]: a system which has helped the US and which has helped the dollar continue to be at the
[Guest]: heart of the global financial system.
[Guest]: So so and in a way, you know, he's he's essentially trying to break the Ponzi structure.
[Guest]: But you know, if and when and if it if he is successful at doing it, it will eventually
[Guest]: end up hurting Americans because all these dollars will not come back to America, interest
[Guest]: rates can go up.
[Guest]: And if interest rates go up the entire, you know, the consumption culture on which essentially,
[Guest]: you know, which is the great big American dream, will will sort of virtuous cycle becomes
[Guest]: a vicious cycle.
[Guest]: So this is another, you know, the, I mean, this in this case, the irony is that the the
[Guest]: Ponzi structure, as it has evolved, is essentially benefiting the US and what I mean, this is
[Guest]: one positive application of the positive application of a Ponzi because you know, we and this is
[Guest]: especially for all those people on the social media who want us to, you know, talk about
[Guest]: good things in life.
[Guest]: So what is social media?
[Amit Varma]: Are you on any social media site?
[Amit Varma]: No, no.
[Guest]: Actually, we are I mean, see, Facebook is dead, okay, Twitter is on its way out.
[Guest]: And we haven't figured out Instagram, you're not there on Instagram, and I am like barely
[Amit Varma]: there.
[Amit Varma]: So see, Instagram is almost yesterday's platform and we are too old for Instagram.
[Unknown]: So just imagine our condition.
[Amit Varma]: This reminds me that there was a gentleman who suggested we do an episode on Ponzi, which
[Amit Varma]: was a proximate trigger for doing this episode.
[Amit Varma]: And even though I'd asked you months ago, let's do an episode on Ponzi, but we should
[Amit Varma]: give a shout out to this gentleman.
[Amit Varma]: I am now on Twitter, I will find him and I will find where he lives and we will go to
[Amit Varma]: his house and we will thank him personally.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, we don't I'm scrolling through my notifications.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, this is a gentleman who calls himself No Chill Bro, and his Twitter handle is at
[Amit Varma]: lalitbhanot1.
[Guest]: Okay, so obviously, there is a name.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So ek shout out banta hai bhai, he says I am not your bhai, but we are giving you a
[Amit Varma]: shout out at lalitbhanot1, No Chill Bro.
[Amit Varma]: And we will also personally send you merchandise if you can send us your birth certificate
[Amit Varma]: and prove that your actual name given to you by your parents is No Chill Bro.
[Guest]: Aadhaar number of No Chill Bro, I mean, maybe it's never mind, everyone's asking for Aadhaar,
[Guest]: we should also.
[Amit Varma]: So yeah, we should also ask for Aadhaar.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, any tweets in future directed to us kindly enclose your Aadhaar number, you
[Amit Varma]: might end up getting some, there should actually be a notification filter, no, any, any tweet
[Amit Varma]: without an Aadhaar number, you don't get the notification.
[Amit Varma]: That's coming up next.
[Amit Varma]: Moving on from this, you know, so we've discussed different kinds of Ponzi schemes, whether
[Amit Varma]: private or public, we've discussed these Ponzi structures, which are overlaid over certain
[Amit Varma]: systems, whether within the financial world or in geopolitics or whatever, what sort of
[Amit Varma]: also intrigues me is that, listen, we are the only species with Ponzi schemes, partly
[Amit Varma]: because we are the only species which trades in narratives, we make stories about the world
[Amit Varma]: and they explain the world to us and they are how we navigate the world, which makes
[Amit Varma]: us extremely susceptible to believing in these Ponzi schemes and get-rich schemes.
[Amit Varma]: What are sort of the different, and I know you've written about this in your paper, and
[Amit Varma]: of course, both you and I for many, many years have been writing about cognitive biases and
[Amit Varma]: logical fallacies and all of them apply here.
[Amit Varma]: What are some of the main ones you would say have something to do with it?
[Guest]: So I mean, obviously, as fundamental as this may sound, I guess the main factor that sort
[Guest]: of encourages Ponzi schemes is the herd mentality.
[Guest]: So there's a beautiful quote in Robert Schiller's book, Irrational Exuberance, and this is how
[Guest]: it goes.
[Guest]: A fundamental observation about human society is that people who communicate regularly with
[Guest]: one another think similarly.
[Guest]: There is at any place and in any time a zeitgeist, a spirit of times.
[Guest]: So what happens is if a person wants to invest, the chances are that he will look around to
[Guest]: see what his friends, family, etc., etc., are doing with their money.
[Guest]: And when they see that the friends, etc., are investing in a particular scheme where
[Guest]: they have made money, so they automatically sort of end up investing there because the
[Guest]: assumption is that, okay, this guy I know and he's made his money, so it should generally
[Guest]: be safe.
[Guest]: People don't go inquiring about it.
[Guest]: And this is true about not just Ponzi schemes, it's true about, I mean, look at why people
[Guest]: buy LIC policies, I mean, they buy LIC policies because, you know, the guy selling them the
[Guest]: policy is known to them, he's a relative, or they've seen people all around them buy
[Guest]: LIC policies.
[Amit Varma]: LIC agents are sort of a downmarket version of the Amway agent, in a sense.
[Guest]: Yeah, I mean, it's the same thing, I mean, it's largely the same thing.
[Amit Varma]: You don't recommend buying LIC schemes, right?
[Guest]: Not at all.
[Guest]: In fact, now, not even, you know, earlier one would have even thought.
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps we will have another episode on that someday, like a fractal emerging out of this
[Guest]: episode.
[Guest]: So, you know, the interesting example here is what, so, you know, Sarada is a great example.
[Guest]: Now, they managed to assure investors that their investments would be safe.
[Guest]: What they did was they employed the agents of Peerless General Finance and Investment
[Guest]: Company.
[Guest]: Now, Peerless was a very popular investment company in parts of Eastern India.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, I remember very, very clearly, because, I mean, I grew up in Eastern India.
[Guest]: Now, it had, it was, you know, it was formed in 1932, and had pioneered the collection
[Guest]: of small savings in Eastern India, primarily in West Bengal.
[Guest]: Now, what had happened was that RBI had forced Peerless to stop taking deposits in 2005-2006.
[Guest]: And this led to a growth of unregulated deposit taking companies in West Bengal and other
[Guest]: Eastern states.
[Guest]: So agents of Peerless, who had always been trusted, because Peerless always repaid, became
[Guest]: agents of Sarada, okay.
[Guest]: And so basically, the the good brand name of, you know, Peerless, which sort of had
[Guest]: been built over almost, almost seven decades, more than seven decades, rubbed on to, rubbed
[Amit Varma]: on to Sarada.
[Amit Varma]: In a sense, it's the same kind of thing we say home trade did by getting celebrity endorsements
[Guest]: from Sachin and Shah Rukh and whatever that rubs off on to you.
[Guest]: But in this case, what I'm talking about is the actual salesman.
[Guest]: And how the, the herd mentality, sort of, how the trust factor came into the herd mentality,
[Guest]: if that is.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also, I guess, there's that natural tendency that once you have invested, you
[Amit Varma]: will immediately rationalize your investment to yourself, you will double down on it, perhaps
[Amit Varma]: even by investing more.
[Amit Varma]: The endowment effect kicks in, where if you own, you know, one of these shares from one
[Amit Varma]: of these companies, it immediately feels more valuable to you than it did when you did not
[Amit Varma]: possess it.
[Amit Varma]: And so on.
[Guest]: So I just like to, you know, read out a small paragraph from the paper that I wrote many
[Guest]: years back.
[Guest]: Now, you know, it's essentially, obviously, you know, you're looking at what people you
[Guest]: know, are doing.
[Guest]: So this is something that we've written, and it's like the desire to conform to the behavior
[Guest]: and opinions of others is a fundamental human trait, an accepted principle of psychology.
[Guest]: If the people around the potential investor invest in a certain way, they might be a tendency
[Guest]: for him to follow them, much like the circular mill of ants, okay, the mill is created when
[Guest]: an army of ants find themselves separated from the colony.
[Guest]: Once they're lost, they obey a simple rule, follow an ant in front of you.
[Guest]: So decisions of investors, much like the circular mills of ants, are not made at the same time,
[Guest]: but in a sequence.
[Guest]: So people who invest in a Ponzi scheme assume that the scheme is a good bet, simply because
[Guest]: some of the people they know have already invested in it.
[Guest]: So everyone ends up making the wrong decisions, because the initial investors get into the
[Guest]: scheme by chance, right?
[Amit Varma]: And this reminds me of something EO Wilson once said, have you heard of the biologist
[Amit Varma]: Edmundo Wilson?
[Amit Varma]: No, there's a great quote by him about communism, where he says, quote, great idea, full stop
[Amit Varma]: wrong species, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And his idea was that low communism is a great idea for ants, which is specifically what
[Amit Varma]: he meant ants and bees, because they are people who are wired to follow central planning commands
[Amit Varma]: from on top and they all act as one body, but human nature being what it is, it cannot,
[Amit Varma]: it simply cannot work.
[Amit Varma]: So in that case, of course, drawing a distinction between ants and humans.
[Amit Varma]: And the reason I made that whole point about no other species having Ponzi schemes, which
[Amit Varma]: is of course, a glib and frivolous point.
[Amit Varma]: But it is also true that as a species, because of our tendency to explain the world to ourselves,
[Amit Varma]: because of narratives, all of these cognitive biases and these fallacies we tend to commit
[Amit Varma]: are sort of hardwired into humans and no other species.
[Amit Varma]: And all of them are useful in different contexts.
[Amit Varma]: But when they go wrong, they sort of go wrong in these sort of ways.
[Amit Varma]: In your paper, you've pointed out, you know, the recency effect, the anchoring effect and
[Guest]: so on.
[Guest]: The other interesting, you know, if we were to talk in millennial terms, there is also
[Guest]: FOMO involved, you know, the fear of missing out on a good investment, the FOMO effect,
[Amit Varma]: FOMO effect.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: The FOMO effect should now get into the language coined for the first time on the scene and
[Guest]: the unseen.
[Guest]: No, it's already there.
[Amit Varma]: It's already there.
[Guest]: FOMO is there.
[Amit Varma]: But the FOMO effect to explain the FOMO effect to explain a proper noun should totally be
[Amit Varma]: credited.
[Amit Varma]: It is.
[Amit Varma]: Yes.
[Amit Varma]: Okay.
[Guest]: So we are behavioral economists.
[Amit Varma]: Now we have coined.
[Amit Varma]: Who knows?
[Amit Varma]: Perhaps one day we'll do an episode of economic funders on storytelling just about the FOMO
[Amit Varma]: effect.
[Guest]: It could happen.
[Guest]: But then obviously, you know, there is first, as I said, is the herd mentality and then
[Guest]: there is greed because, you know, you see that you compare the rate of returns on other
[Guest]: investment which is available.
[Guest]: And in this case, as I said, the returns available, returns which are offered on Ponzi schemes
[Guest]: are generally significantly higher than the other schemes available in the market.
[Guest]: So let me just give you a few schemes and then the kind of returns that they offered.
[Guest]: So there was a Rose Valley Ponzi scheme in West Bengal a few years back that offered
[Guest]: anywhere between 11.2 percent to 17.7 percent.
[Guest]: PSCL offered 12.5 to 14 percent.
[Guest]: Sarda reportedly offered returns on 17.5 to 22 percent.
[Guest]: So and I mean, we've already seen the returns on offer in case of Speak Asia and MMM, you
[Guest]: know, where a 5000 rupee investment was supposed to sort of become 3.4 crore at the end of
[Guest]: the year.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, with good advertising and stories of previous investors, as I said,
[Guest]: you know, who made a killing by investing in the scheme, investors get caught in the
[Guest]: euphoria that is generated and hand over their hard-earned money, much against going against
[Guest]: common sense.
[Guest]: And, you know, I'd like to quote this economic historian called Charles Kindleberger here.
[Guest]: And this is what he said, there is nothing so disturbing to one's well-being and judgment
[Guest]: as to see a friend get rich.
[Guest]: So again, I mean, it's basically boils down to herd mentality and the fear of missing
[Guest]: out.
[Guest]: And overconfidence and over-optimism also have a role to play.
[Guest]: As you said that, you know, once you are invested into something, you tend to rationalize that
[Guest]: because I'm already in it, this is going to work out right, which may or may not.
[Guest]: Then there is the contrast effect, wherein you compare with all the other available options
[Guest]: and see that this is the best option going around.
[Guest]: Mental accounting also plays a role.
[Guest]: Now, mental accounting as you know, if regular listeners, have you discussed mental accounting?
[Guest]: I'm sure you would have it in some way.
[Amit Varma]: I haven't discussed mental accounting per se, but it's a subject of episode two of economic
[Amit Varma]: funders now on Storytel.
[Guest]: Once it is released today, I'm going to take every opportunity to plug it.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not plugging a Ponzi scheme.
[Amit Varma]: Free trial on Storytel, sign up at Storytel.com slash funders to just search for Amit Verma
[Amit Varma]: or Vivek Kaul or economic funders.
[Amit Varma]: Okay, we didn't plan this.
[Amit Varma]: This wasn't a planned plug.
[Guest]: So essentially, you know, what mental accounting was a term coined by Richard Thiller, as we
[Guest]: as we know.
[Guest]: And he defined it as the inclination to categorize and treat money differently, depending on
[Guest]: where it comes from, and where it is kept and how it is spent.
[Guest]: So basically, you know, gamblers who lose their winnings, for example, typically feel
[Guest]: that they haven't lost anything.
[Guest]: And though they would have been richer had they stopped while they were ahead, right?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, the classic illustration of that is, let's say I sit down at a poker table
[Amit Varma]: with a lakh, and I've turned it into two lakh, you know, so at the last hand of the day,
[Amit Varma]: if I feel like gambling it up, I'll say, okay, I'll gamble with my one lakh winnings.
[Amit Varma]: While the truth is, had I sat down right there with two lakhs, I would not have gambled with
[Amit Varma]: an amount as big as a lakh.
[Amit Varma]: But because I have, you know, created separate mental accounts for what I came with and what
[Amit Varma]: I have won, you know, I am treating them differently.
[Guest]: So similarly, in a Ponzi scheme, once investors have got a certain return on their investment,
[Guest]: they do not hesitate to plow their returns back into the thing.
[Guest]: So which is where mental accounting sort of comes into play.
[Guest]: And obviously, I mean, the greater fool theory as we as we talked about, you know, in many
[Guest]: cases, investors understand that it's a Ponzi scheme.
[Amit Varma]: There's also sort of the Dunning-Kroger effect, which is a tendency of incompetent people
[Amit Varma]: to think that they're better than they really are.
[Amit Varma]: And that I think plays out, especially when it comes to the stock market, because people
[Amit Varma]: will, for example, get a little half-baked knowledge, and then they will jharod that
[Amit Varma]: wisdom to everyone.
[Amit Varma]: And they will imagine them to be greater experts.
[Amit Varma]: And they actually are on the basis of that half-baked knowledge, which helps them rationalize
[Amit Varma]: the foolish investments they're making.
[Guest]: And sometimes they're lucky they find it.
[Amit Varma]: And in an environment if all stocks are going up, yeah, so they end up, you know, because
[Amit Varma]: but I think most of the people who invest in a rising market tell themselves are making
[Amit Varma]: good investments.
[Amit Varma]: Anyway, they don't think about it as you know, it is I know this investment is stupid in
[Amit Varma]: terms of fundamental value, but it is rational because the likelihood of a greater fool is
[Amit Varma]: very high.
[Amit Varma]: But you know, I could respect an investor like that.
[Amit Varma]: But I don't think most investors think like that way.
[Guest]: So yeah, so obviously, the greater fool theory is also at play, wherein, you know, some of
[Guest]: the investors and I have, you know, over the years met a lot of these investors who know
[Guest]: that they're dealing with a Ponzi scheme, but they still go ahead because the entire
[Guest]: the feeling is that, you know, they will be able to get out the music playing you have
[Guest]: to dance before before the scheme collapses.
[Guest]: So these are some of the behavioral so called aspects which play a huge role, which sort
[Guest]: of, I mean, gets people to invest in a Ponzi scheme over and over again.
[Guest]: And I think the what also happens is, I mean, this has got nothing to do with behavioral
[Guest]: aspects.
[Guest]: I mean, as we discussed a little earlier, you know, in most cases, we don't come to
[Guest]: know as to even you know, even when these frauds are caught, we don't know as to what
[Guest]: happens to them.
[Guest]: I mean, take a case like speak Asia, right?
[Guest]: The scheme collapsed.
[Guest]: And you know, what happened to the guys who were running the scheme?
[Guest]: I mean, did the people get their money back?
[Guest]: So it's very important that this information also comes back to us.
[Guest]: Because, you know, if the people who are running these frauds are not getting punished, I mean,
[Guest]: what stops people from, you know, running more of these frauds over and over again,
[Amit Varma]: I mean, if any editors of financial papers are listening, maybe that's a whole new feature.
[Amit Varma]: You could do one of these weekends about what happened to fraudsters of the past.
[Guest]: I mean, everyone from like, I mean, we do sort of, you know, people do get to know what
[Guest]: a, you know, Ketan Parekh is up to.
[Guest]: But Ketan Parekh was like this one big guy who, you know, who ran a scam and essentially
[Guest]: borrowed money from Madhya Pradesh Cooperative Bank and diverted it into the stock market
[Guest]: and pushed up what were then called the K10 stocks.
[Guest]: Obviously, you know, his game ran out.
[Guest]: But I mean, but then there are so many of these small Ponzi schemes which are around
[Guest]: and a lot of them are MLM Ponzi schemes where money is lost.
[Guest]: But one really never comes to know as to what happens to the guys who, you know, ran these
[Guest]: schemes.
[Guest]: So, so a lot of the guys who run these Ponzi schemes, you know, have a halo effect around
[Guest]: them.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they have this infectious optimism, wealth creators, you know, we're going to
[Guest]: do this and we're going to get this right and, and, and obviously, you know, the media
[Guest]: loves, the media loves heroes, I mean, they make heroes only to sort of pull them down
[Guest]: later.
[Guest]: So, I remember of this, this, this quote, by this gentleman called C. Natesan, who ran
[Guest]: the Anubhav Plantation scheme.
[Guest]: So Natesan basically, you know, said that, I mean, so he sort of tried selling himself
[Guest]: and his companies as someone who always was interested in planting trees and had now turned
[Guest]: it into a business.
[Guest]: So I always wanted to plant trees.
[Guest]: As a child, I used to feel sad seeing trees burned down in my village in Tirunelveli.
[Guest]: Now, again, I mean, and then, I mean, we all remember Harshad Mehta, right?
[Guest]: So Harshad Mehta's scam was also like a Ponzi scheme, wherein he was siphoning off money
[Guest]: from banks and, you know, then diverting it into the stock market and siphoning off more
[Guest]: money from banks and, you know, diverting it again into the stock market and, you know,
[Guest]: then, you know, he kept driving up the prices.
[Guest]: So he apparently remarked once, in an interview, wherein he said that I thought I'd be like
[Guest]: Pied Piper, I thought I can sell dreams, that asset creation is not a crime, that if you
[Guest]: want to be Harshad Mehta, come to the stock market.
[Guest]: Now, I mean, you know, this is such a, you know, optimistic thing to say, inspirational
[Amit Varma]: quote.
[Amit Varma]: Hero of the common people.
[Guest]: And which is why I mean, this, this sort of, you know, gets us back to the social media.
[Guest]: And I don't know if it happens to you, it happens to me all the time where this random
[Guest]: guy will come in and say, you know, if this, you know, why do you keep saying these negative
[Guest]: things and spoil the environment?
[Guest]: And why don't you talk about positive things and, you know, all this.
[Amit Varma]: And the job of journalists anyway, is to afflict the comfortable and comfort the afflicted.
[Guest]: So you know,
[Guest]: And more than that, I mean, it's not my job to, you know, make you happy in life.
[Amit Varma]: But we have a remarkable episode 12 dream reforms.
[Guest]: Yes, we did that.
[Guest]: I mean, if people didn't, yeah.
[Guest]: So we give solutions also.
[Amit Varma]: But I think it's more of a job to sort of talk about all the things that are going wrong.
[Amit Varma]: So people know about them, because acknowledging the problem is at least a first step to a
[Amit Varma]: solution.
[Guest]: My aforementioned question, sorry, how do you sort of before you cut in my aforementioned
[Amit Varma]: question to which I think is a legit question, which is that listen, yeah, most people do
[Amit Varma]: not have the cognitive bandwidth in terms of the time I mean, they're busy doing their
[Amit Varma]: everyday things.
[Amit Varma]: They don't have the cognitive bandwidth to take decisions on complex subjects like where
[Amit Varma]: should they invest their money and so on.
[Amit Varma]: My advice to people, for example, about the stock market always is and I think you'd agree
[Amit Varma]: with me is that unless you have studied it in great depth, don't invest in the stock
[Amit Varma]: market at all.
[Amit Varma]: Because otherwise, you're one of the suckers like in poker, they say if you don't know
[Amit Varma]: who's the sucker at the table, it's you.
[Amit Varma]: But the thing is, most people now don't have the time to get that kind of detailed knowledge.
[Amit Varma]: They rely on all of these instincts, which you earlier mentioned, look around you what
[Amit Varma]: are successful people apparently doing, there is, you know, the FOMO effect comes into play
[Amit Varma]: and so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: So now if someone is to ask you that, listen, yeah, Vivek, I have a, I spend all my time
[Amit Varma]: and all my mental energy on making a living at whatever I do now, when I look to invest
[Amit Varma]: or when these kinds of opportunities come up, what are the heuristics, which I should
[Amit Varma]: apply to make sure that I am not being fooled?
[Amit Varma]: You know, what are the kinds of heuristics which I can look at?
[Amit Varma]: And I'll take a short at, you know, two quick answers which come to my mind, and then you
[Amit Varma]: can elaborate and give more of your own.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is, there is no such thing as a free lunch.
[Amit Varma]: If someone is offering you, for example, far greater rate of returns and everybody else
[Amit Varma]: in the market, they must, you know, it fails a smell test, ask yourself, why that would
[Amit Varma]: be.
[Amit Varma]: And the other heuristic I'd offer is that, again, it's a cliche, if it feels too good
[Amit Varma]: to be true, it probably is, you know, these are my two heuristics that I would offer what
[Guest]: are yours?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: I agree with you 100% on that, I mean, so anyone, so I would sort of put it in a slightly
[Guest]: more technical term.
[Guest]: So the moment anyone other than a bank, okay, guarantees you a rate of return, you know
[Guest]: you're being fooled.
[Guest]: I mean, it's very, very clear there.
[Guest]: So you have to be careful about that.
[Guest]: The second thing is also, you know, you look at the fact that if, let's say banks are offering
[Guest]: a rate of interest of 7%, 6% or whatever, as they are right now.
[Guest]: So in that market, if someone's offering you a return of, let's say, 15% or 20%, you know
[Guest]: that there is something wrong there.
[Guest]: Other than that, you know, so other than I think more than heuristics, you know, I have
[Guest]: these 10 points, which I think are useful for anyone who wants to generally plan their
[Guest]: personal finance.
[Guest]: And so, if you're okay with that, I can
[Amit Varma]: Please, please give us all 10 points.
[Guest]: So okay, now, I mean, before I get into the 10, I'll first give you some of the most basic
[Guest]: points.
[Guest]: So the most basic point in investing is never have all your eggs in one basket.
[Guest]: And this is, when I say this, I mean this within investments and across investments.
[Guest]: So what it basically means is that if, okay, you don't want to do anything in the world,
[Guest]: you want to just deposit money in a bank, please don't go and deposit all your money
[Guest]: in one bank.
[Guest]: I mean, that is by far the most stupid thing you can do.
[Guest]: I mean, after that, you can't claim that you know, you are financially illiterate and you're
[Guest]: not very sophisticated.
[Guest]: And I mean, I find it, I mean, if you're educated enough to open a bank account, then you need
[Guest]: to be educated enough to not have all your money in one bank.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, Vivek has a slight smile on his face.
[Amit Varma]: At this point, I will inform my listeners very sheepishly that time and again, Vivek
[Amit Varma]: has berated me, because I have only one bank account, which is an HDFC bank, and I keep
[Amit Varma]: telling him it won't shut down.
[Amit Varma]: But even if people take the money in that there is so little of it that who cares, buy
[Guest]: something nice, buy some vada pavs, kindly continue with other points.
[Guest]: So that's the, you know, the most basic point.
[Guest]: And I mean, if I mean, look at what has been happening with the PMC bank, and some of the
[Guest]: videos floating around and people you know, there are people saying I had only 25 lakhs
[Guest]: and all of it was in the in this bank.
[Guest]: Now, I mean, if you had 25 lakhs, and if you had the ability to earn those 25 lakhs, why
[Guest]: did you have all of it in one bank account?
[Guest]: I mean, I find it a little, you know, when people sort of, and especially in an era where
[Guest]: people spend so much time and energy in planning a holiday and but the moment they have to
[Guest]: plan their money, you know, all their faculties go for a toss.
[Guest]: I mean, I know so many people who spend weeks planning a holiday.
[Guest]: I mean, I mean, you can spend one day planning your finances as well.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, it's not going to hurt you in any way.
[Guest]: I just bought a new phone, and I spent so much time researching that I could have like,
[Guest]: so one of the things that I do in life, you know, when I need to buy a phone, I don't
[Guest]: do any research, I have a price point.
[Guest]: And I see as to you know, who's within that price point, which are the largest selling
[Guest]: phones, and I go and buy that phone.
[Guest]: Because if so many people are already making that mistake, you know, I can as well.
[Amit Varma]: And since our listeners are getting a bonanza of free funders from us during the show, I
[Amit Varma]: will offer another nugget Have you heard of this term called satisficing?
[Amit Varma]: So satisficing is a portmanteau term, which is like, it's a combination of two existing
[Amit Varma]: words, satisfying, and sufficing.
[Amit Varma]: And the concept comes from the fact that decisions tire us out, every decision takes a certain
[Amit Varma]: amount of energy, leaving less energy for other decisions and indeed other work.
[Amit Varma]: So a lot of people fight this what is known as decision fatigue, by satisficing when it
[Amit Varma]: comes to purchases.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're doing a major purchase, like you're buying a house, obviously, you spend
[Amit Varma]: the time to research that.
[Amit Varma]: But if you're buying a phone, or if you're buying a book, or if you're buying, you know,
[Amit Varma]: any electronic implement, then you know, you know that all the brands and all the categories
[Amit Varma]: are more or less okay.
[Amit Varma]: So you satisfy, you satisfy yourself with the first one that appears to suffice.
[Amit Varma]: And it's called satisficing.
[Amit Varma]: And and in fact, decision fatigue is also a reason, for example, why people like Steve
[Amit Varma]: Jobs, and now Mark Zuckerberg, they dress the same way every day, it feels like a uniform
[Guest]: like for Steve Jobs, it was a black belt.
[Guest]: That was something that you don't have to take a decision, there was something that
[Amit Varma]: Albert Einstein started, Einstein started, there you go, it comes from the finest minds
[Guest]: that he wanted to save his mental energy.
[Guest]: I think he had seven suits of the same kind.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Because he didn't want to spend time figuring out what to wear.
[Guest]: So in fact, I do that in my own little way, I have three shirts of the same kind.
[Amit Varma]: Ditto, I mean, I in fact, if you notice, last year, during my keto diet, I just cycled between
[Amit Varma]: black t shirts and jeans.
[Guest]: So it just keeps the life.
[Guest]: I mean, for jeans, I have just two pairs of jeans, and I just keep changing it to I have
[Amit Varma]: more, but I use just to figure out what to wear.
[Guest]: Okay, so now, also, neither of us can afford more given the times we live.
[Guest]: Yes, I mean, yeah, we are.
[Guest]: I think we should start asking for donations also.
[Amit Varma]: Speaking of bubbles, I should ask you about the online journalism bubble at some point,
[Amit Varma]: but let that pass.
[Guest]: Let's continue.
[Guest]: What's your second point?
[Guest]: No.
[Guest]: So these are, these are the 10 main points.
[Guest]: I mean, other than, you know, I didn't put I didn't want to put the diversification point
[Guest]: into this, because it's just very, very basic.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So if you can't even do that, then I mean, God help you.
[Guest]: So if your family is dependent on you, buy a term insurance policy.
[Guest]: If no one is dependent on you, you don't need insurance, okay?
[Guest]: Stay away from investment plans, which pretend to be insurance, endowment, money back, you
[Guest]: lips, life will be very simple.
[Guest]: Buy a house if you're planning to live in it.
[Guest]: Stay away from under construction properties as far as possible.
[Guest]: Further, try to buy an apartment in a society where people are already living.
[Guest]: So that if there is some, you know, bureaucratic or administrative problem, you're not the
[Guest]: only one running around, when there are other people involved.
[Guest]: And in India, it is very, very important because, you know, all societies have some lafda at
[Guest]: the end of the day.
[Guest]: Have a health insurance policy for your entire family.
[Guest]: To meet emergencies, have some money in a bank account, which could meet expenses of
[Guest]: three to six months, I mean, at the very basic.
[Guest]: If you want the ability to make decisions that you feel are correct, at any point of
[Guest]: time in your life, you need at least two years of expenses in the bank account.
[Guest]: I mean, then you can, you know, ask your boss to fuck off and do what the right thing is,
[Guest]: what you feel the right thing is.
[Guest]: But without that, you can't.
[Guest]: Have an SIP running on a few good equity mutual funds, review the performance once a year.
[Guest]: Don't go looking at the returns every week, a lot of people do that.
[Guest]: If not every week, at least they have a tendency to look at every month.
[Guest]: There is good research that shows that people who look at their returns regularly tend to
[Guest]: invest in equity for shorter terms than people who don't, and which basically means then
[Guest]: you lose out on returns.
[Guest]: After a certain age, make a will.
[Guest]: Also make sure that when it comes to all your investments, nominations are in place.
[Guest]: Because I mean, I have seen a few issues of where, you know, the husband has died and
[Guest]: the wife has no idea where he had invested and, and it's too late to sort of start again
[Guest]: from scratch.
[Guest]: Make your tax saving investments at the beginning of the year, if you're investing in things
[Guest]: like public provident fund, or do them through the year.
[Guest]: If you're investing in things like let's say a tax saving mutual fund, don't wake up in
[Guest]: the last week of the year to make your tax saving investment when you're more likely
[Guest]: to be taken for a ride because you'll end up investing in anything, you know, anyone
[Guest]: who basically comes to your house and just gets you to sign whatever paper they want
[Guest]: to.
[Guest]: Also be careful when you go to a bank for anything, because these days, they you know,
[Guest]: the moment you enter a bank, they want to sell you things that you don't need.
[Guest]: Make sure that you end up doing what you had gone there for, okay.
[Guest]: So I mean, the example like I like to give here is that someone sold a pension plan to
[Guest]: my father a few weeks before he was retiring, okay, so thankfully, I found out and you know,
[Guest]: so all insurance policies, again, remember this all so called insurance policies have
[Guest]: a 15 day look in period.
[Guest]: So if you want, don't feel comfortable with it, you can go ahead and return it and get
[Guest]: your money back.
[Guest]: Also, finally, and you know, no one ever made money out of investing by watching TV channels.
[Guest]: So you have to, you know, stay as far away from the CNBCs of the world if you really
[Guest]: want to make any money in life.
[Guest]: So these are I think, the 10 basic things, they're not very difficult, there is no rocket
[Guest]: science involved here.
[Guest]: And all of this can be easily executed.
[Amit Varma]: Very wise words.
[Amit Varma]: And I think many of our listeners should certainly listen to this part again and take notes.
[Amit Varma]: I really don't have much funds to invest.
[Amit Varma]: So it's not very useful to me.
[Amit Varma]: Someday you should tell me about you know, how can I actually make some money that I
[Amit Varma]: can later invest?
[Guest]: Do you have any schemes in mind?
[Guest]: Let's start a Ponzi scheme, Amit.
[Guest]: Let's start a Ponzi scheme.
[Guest]: And what we'll do is, we'll have the podcast as the business model.
[Amit Varma]: There you go.
[Amit Varma]: All these listeners built up for what?
[Guest]: We'll obviously and we'll say that, you know, if you invest in these podcasts, let's say
[Guest]: 10,000 rupees, we'll give you 15,000 at the end of the year 50% return is pretty amazing.
[Amit Varma]: And they'll trust me because I always deliver.
[Guest]: And the model will be that we'll have ads in the podcast and those ads will give us
[Guest]: the returns.
[Guest]: And before one year, we'll just take the money and possibly go to Antigua, where you can
[Amit Varma]: buy citizenship for as low as $100,000.
[Amit Varma]: I'm not going there, bro.
[Amit Varma]: They don't like cows, Antigua.
[Amit Varma]: Let's...
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, no, we shall inflict neither bad jokes nor any such scheme on you.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, you get our awesome content for free.
[Amit Varma]: So what's that about?
[Amit Varma]: Thank you so much for listening to us and Vivek, thanks for coming on the show, man.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: It's been great talking to you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to the show, do head on over to storytel.com slash funders where
[Amit Varma]: the new show hosted by me and Vivek has just launched is called economic funders search
[Amit Varma]: for it, you'll find five episodes already.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Vivek on Twitter at call underscore Vivek.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of the scene in the unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The scene in the unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila's postgraduate program starts in Jan 2020, admissions are now open.
[Amit Varma]: The last couple of years I've actually taught a course on how to write an op-ed within that.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know if I will next year, but it's a great course regardless.
[Amit Varma]: Find out more about it at takshashila.org.in.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Hi guys, this is Ayushi and I am Ritasha and welcome to Agla Station adulthood.
[Unknown]: It's a fun podcast we've got going on and we'd love for you to tune in and enjoy with
[Unknown]: us.
[Unknown]: Join us as we stop at various stations and discuss different topics that seem to be bothering
[Unknown]: us and hopefully you do as well.
[Unknown]: Dating, relationships, beauty, just being an adult, lots of different things.
[Unknown]: We don't have a great grip on it, but we've done okay so far.
[Unknown]: Catch Agla Station adulthood every Thursday on the IBM app, the IBM website or wherever
[Unknown]: else you get your podcasts.
[Unknown]: Hi my name is Anupam Gupta, I'm B50 on Twitter.
[Unknown]: I am the host of Paisa Paisa, the show that talks money.
[Unknown]: On my show, I speak to experts from every field of money and finance, from stock markets,
[Unknown]: equities, debt funds, credit cards, life insurance, every possible area of money and finance that
[Unknown]: you can think of.
[Unknown]: We even did an episode on cryptocurrency.
[Unknown]: I've got fantastic guests from mutual funds to personal finance experts everywhere, robo
[Unknown]: advisory startup, just name it, we've got it.
[Unknown]: At Paisa Paisa, we help you make smart decisions about money.
[Unknown]: You work hard for money, now make your money work hard for you.
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Monday and you can listen to my show on the IBM podcast app or
[Unknown]: any other podcasting app that you have.